The Project Gutenberg eBook of Strength and How to Obtain It
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Strength and How to Obtain It

Author: Eugen Sandow


        
Release date: August 3, 2021 [eBook #65987]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/65987

Credits: Tim Lindell, Les Galloway and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STRENGTH AND HOW TO OBTAIN IT ***

                          Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.

Italics are represented thus _italic_, bold thus =bold=.




[Illustration: The Author, signed, Yours truly Eugen Sandow]


                               STRENGTH

                                  AND

                           HOW TO OBTAIN IT,

                                  BY

                             EUGEN SANDOW,

                                 WITH

                           ANATOMICAL CHART,

                             ILLUSTRATING

                  EXERCISES FOR PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT.


                           REVISED EDITION.


          ILLUSTRATED WITH FULL PAGE PORTRAITS OF THE AUTHOR
                        AND SOME OF HIS PUPILS.

         _Reproduced from Photographs by Falk of New York, and
                    Warwick Brookes of Manchester._


                                London:
                         GALE & POLDEN, LTD.,
     2, AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C., AND WELLINGTON WORKS,
                              ALDERSHOT.

                           TWO-AND-SIX NETT.




                    PRINTED BY GALE & POLDEN, LTD.,
                           WELLINGTON WORKS,
                              ALDERSHOT.


                   _Copyright--Gale & Polden, Ltd._




INTRODUCTION.


In writing this book I have taken it as a commonplace that
everyone--man, woman, and child--wants to be strong. Without
strength--and by strength I mean health, vitality, and a general sense
of physical well-being--life is but a gloomy business. Wealth, talent,
ambition, the love and affection of friends, the pleasure derived
from doing good to those about one, all these things may afford some
consolation for being deprived of life’s chief blessing, but they
can never make up for it. “But,” I am constantly being asked, “it is
all very well for you to say this, and everyone of sense agrees with
you; the point is, can we obtain this much-prized blessing?” In the
vast majority of cases I can say unhesitatingly “Yes.” You can all
be strong, all enjoy the heritage which was intended for you. Not
all to the same extent, perhaps. Those who are afflicted with some
hereditary disease, who may have unsound organs handed down to them,
cannot reasonably expect to get such results as their more fortunate
brethren. Still, even they need not despair; even if their condition
be such as to put out of the question any such thing as athletics,
they can, at all events, attain to such a condition as will permit of
their enjoying life, and render them fit to carry on their work without
difficulty. And after all, those who wish to be strong for this reason
are innumerable. It is only the young and vigorous who desire to excel
in athletic pastimes, but the middle-aged and elderly, the delicate
women and young children, who yearn for health are countless. I claim
that by carefully following out my system, as set out in the following
pages, and fully illustrated in the Anatomical Chart at the end of the
volume, these results may be attained.




NOTE TO THE SECOND EDITION.


It is nearly two years since the first edition of “Strength and How
to Obtain it” was published, and its success has been very gratifying
to me. It plainly demonstrates that the people of my adopted country
are gradually beginning to understand and appreciate what is meant
by “physical culture,” and that my ideas are steadily taking root in
productive ground. I am, therefore, encouraged to bring out a new
edition of the book, which, I trust, will be an improvement upon its
predecessor. Several chapters have been added and a few inaccuracies
and ambiguities remedied, and I trust the book in its new form will
find favour with my readers. I wish to draw particular attention to
chapters V. and VIII., in which I refer to “My ‘Grip’ Dumb-bell” and
to “Physical Culture for Women.” There are various other additions to
which I need not refer here. Sufficient to say that during the past
eighteen months I have learned much, and that so far as lies in my
power I have endeavoured to give the benefit of such knowledge as I
have acquired to all who believe with me that the cultivation of the
body is a sacred and imperative duty.

  EUGEN SANDOW.




                                PART I.

                    MY SYSTEM OF PHYSICAL CULTURE.




                               STRENGTH

                                  AND

                           HOW TO OBTAIN IT.




CHAPTER I.

CONCERNING PHYSICAL CULTURE.


It is curious to me to look back a year or two and to reflect upon the
change in public opinion upon this subject which has taken place in
so short a time. When I first began to preach the “gospel of health
and strength” the general tendency was to make fun of me. Some people
called me a fool; others, a charlatan. Very few indeed took the
trouble to see whether there was anything in my theories, and to test
for themselves their truth or falsity. That was, so to speak, only
yesterday; what an alteration, and an alteration for the better, is to
be observed to-day. I shall not be accused of undue egotism if I say
that my ideas have “caught on.” All over the country, among the young,
“physical culture” is now the rage, and that it is no mere passing
fancy is proved by the fact that those who are no longer in their first
youth are its equally devoted, though possibly less feverish, disciples.

“And what is physical culture?” is naturally the question which arises
to the lips of those to whom the subject is still unfamiliar. Let me
begin by saying what it _is not_. To begin with, to suppose, as many
people do suppose, that athletics and physical culture are the same
thing is quite a mistaken notion. Then is physical culture opposed to
athletics? Certainly not. Cricket and football and rowing and swimming,
and, indeed, all forms of manly sport and exercise, are admirable
things in their way, but they are not physical culture. A part of it,
if you like; but physical culture is something far wider in its scope,
infinitely loftier in its ideals.

What was the ideal of the Greeks? They were ardent athletes, but their
pastimes were only regarded as a means to an end. The Greeks regarded
the culture of the body as a sacred duty; their aim was to bring it to
the highest possible state of power and beauty, and we know how they
succeeded. Surely what they succeeded in doing cannot be impossible for
us.

Does the reader now begin to get a clearer idea of what is meant
by physical culture? As I have previously said, it is to the body
what culture, in the accepted sense of the word, is to the mind. To
constantly and persistently cultivate the whole of the body so that at
last it shall be capable of anything that sound organs and perfectly
developed muscles can accomplish--that is physical culture. The
production, in short, of an absolutely perfect body--that is physical
culture. To undo the evil for which civilization, and all the drawbacks
it has brought in its train, have been responsible in making man regard
his body lightly--that is the aim of physical culture. I think I am
justified in saying that while it embraces every variety of athletics
it goes very much further.

Possibly there are people who will refuse to admit that this aim is
in itself a desirable one. They may say that the sound body is only
valuable in so far as it enables the sound mind to perform its work.
This I regard as nonsensical cant. I absolutely and strenuously refuse
to allow for an instant that the cultivation of the body is, _per se_,
a comparatively valueless thing. On the contrary, I maintain that he
who neglects his body--and not to cultivate it _is_ to neglect it--is
guilty of the worst sin; for he sins against Nature. I take my stand
upon this then--that the care of the body is in itself an absolutely
good thing, and its neglect is no more to be excused than is the
neglect of the opportunities of mental advancement which have been
placed in a man’s way. I am quite aware that it takes a very long time
to thoroughly free ourselves from the trammels of old-established
prejudice. I am quite prepared to hear of some worthy folk gravely
shaking their heads and deprecating any great amount of attention being
paid to the body as likely to engender undue vanity and self-esteem. I
do not think that is likely to be so, but even if it should be the case
I do not hold it to be such a grievous matter. If a man has striven his
utmost to make the best of himself a certain amount of pride in the
fact may well be forgiven him. Or, at all events, we can look upon his
failing with the eye of charity.

       ———————————————

I do not think I can conclude this chapter better than by reprinting
some remarks on the subject which I wrote in the first number of
“Physical Culture,” my monthly magazine. The article was carefully
thought out, and I do not think there is any need for me to add to it.
“For after all, why should not a man feel some pride in a healthy and
well-cared-for body? Though I contend that it in itself is emphatically
a good thing, that is not to say the effects of physical culture are
confined to the body. In bringing the body to its highest pitch of
perfection, various moral qualities, the value of which it would be
difficult to over-estimate, must necessarily be brought into play. The
first essential to success is the power of concentrating the will upon
the work. Muscles are not developed by muscular action alone. Physical
exertion, however arduous and long continued, will not make a man
strong, or the day labourer and the blacksmith would be the strongest
of men. Mechanical and desultory exertion will never materially
increase a man’s strength. He must first learn the great secret, which
ought to be no secret at all. He must use his mind. He may not be able
to add a cubit to his stature, but by taking thought a man can most
assuredly increase the size of his muscles, strengthen all his organs,
and add to his general vitality. But he must put his mind, as well as
his muscles, into the work. And by exercise and practice the will-power
is greatly increased, until, in course of time, the whole organism
is so absolutely under its control that the muscles can be kept in
perfect condition even without what, in ordinary language, is called
“exercise.” That is to say, that without violent exertion, but merely
by the exertion of the will, the muscles can be exercised almost to
any extent. Can it for a moment be supposed that this cultivation of
the will-power is not of great value to an individual, no matter what
sort of task or work he may be engaged in? Is it not largely by the
exercise of will-power that most things are achieved? Take two men of
equal talents; give them equal opportunities; but let one’s will-power
and power of concentration be relatively much greater than his
fellow’s. Then set them to perform the same task. Which will succeed
best? No person endowed with ordinary intelligence can be in doubt for
a moment. Will-power is a mighty factor--perhaps the mightiest--in
all that goes to make up the sum of human success or failure. But the
strengthening of will--though perhaps the chief--is not by a long way
the only benefit which physical culture confers. The man who means to
make his body as nearly perfect as possible must perforce cultivate
habits of self-control and of temperance. Not the temperance which
consists of rigidly abstaining from all the ‘pleasant vices,’ but the
_real_ temperance which teaches a man to say ‘No,’ which teaches him to
indulge in all that is conducive to happiness without being in danger
of that overstepping of the boundary line which leads to misery. The
man who has cultivated his body has also cultivated self-respect. He
has learned the virtue and the happiness of rigid personal cleanliness;
his views of life are sane and wholesome. Respecting himself he learns
to respect others. He is gentle, and only uses his powers against his
fellowmen when called upon to do so in the defence of the oppressed
and helpless. It is your weakling who is generally a bully and a
tyrant. To take a few men who are exceptionally endowed by Nature, to
make them extraordinarily strong, and to then train them to perform
particular feats, is not a thing very difficult of accomplishment.
But that is not the aim of physical culture. Its ultimate object is
to raise the average standard of the race as a whole. That is, no
doubt, a stupendous task, and one which it may take many lifetimes to
accomplish. But everything must have its beginning, and unless we set
about improving the physique of the present generation, we cannot hope
to benefit those who come after us. Healthier and more perfect men and
women will beget children with better constitutions and more free from
hereditary taint. They in their turn, if the principles and the duty
of physical culture are early instilled into them, will grow up more
perfect types of men and women than were their mothers and fathers.
So the happy progression will go on, until, who knows, if in the days
to come there will not be a race of mortals walking this earth of
ours even surpassing those who, according to the old myth, were the
offspring of the union of the sons of the gods with the daughters of
men! That is, perhaps, an almost impossible ideal, but it is well to
set one’s ideals high. Surely what has been done for the horse and the
dog cannot be impossible of accomplishment in the case of man. At all
events, it is worth trying.”

To wind up this chapter with a word of encouragement to those who come
quite fresh to the subject; to those who in taking up Physical Culture
are venturing into what is to them unexplored territory--“Read, think,
and work. Do not be disheartened because your progress at first seems
slow; nothing worth having is to be won without labour. I can only
tell you what to do, only point out to you the right road. The rest
lies with yourself. I should be the sorriest humbug if I endeavoured
to make you believe otherwise, and you would be the simplest of fools
if you _did_ believe me. There is no royal road to success, and a very
bad thing would it be if there were. For your reward lies not so much
in the accomplishment as in the effort and struggle, and all the good
qualities which they bring out.”




CHAPTER II.

THE PROGRESS OF THE SYSTEM.


I have already remarked upon the satisfactory progress which the
system has made during the last few years. It is probably well-known
that my system has practically been adopted in the Army; although the
method adopted in the Army gymnasia is not absolutely identical with
that which I advocate, it is obviously based upon the same principles.
People may be interested to hear that since I opened my first school,
some eighteen months ago, amongst my pupils have been a great number
of gentlemen, who, desirous of adopting the Army as a career, have
been unable to do so through not coming up to the physical standpoint
required. In many cases they have actually been rejected on this
account; in others they have been fearful that such might be their
fate, and have come to me in order to avoid it. Some have not been
heavy enough for their height; others lacking in chest measurement,
and so on. Now let my system be judged by the results. _In not a
single instance have I failed to do what is necessary._ That may stand
by itself without any further comment from me. However, as a further
proof of the efficacy of the system, I may say that I have put an
_inch_ on the _height_ of a young fellow in _three weeks_! This may
sound incredible, but it is an absolute fact. The majority of these
gentlemen, whom I have helped to pass the Army “medical,” have written
me appreciative letters, and though for obvious reasons I cannot
publish them, I shall be happy to show them to any reader who may care
to call at the St. James’-street school. That the value of the system
is fully recognised in the Army is demonstrated by the letter from
Colonel Fox, late inspector of the Army Gymnasia, which appears in this
book. Amongst the civilian public the system is spreading rapidly;
private individuals are taking it up and working steadily in their own
homes, whilst in a great number of gymnasia throughout the country,
classes are being formed to carry it out. In connection with this, it
is highly diverting to notice that various individuals who are never
tired of denouncing me and all my works, have set up as “professors”
of physical culture, and are actually teaching my system! Of course
they would be loth to admit this, and would assert that it is a system
of their own. All I can say is that by a strange coincidence nearly
every one of these systems which I have examined is based upon the same
principles as my own. Now that I have made mention of those who try to
gain notoriety by attacking my system, I cannot refrain from commenting
upon certain statements which, having been widely circulated, may tend
to do the system injury. The subject is, I think, worthy of a short
chapter to itself.




CHAPTER III.

THE STUPIDITY OF ENVY.


The statement to which I refer is this--that though by my system a man
may increase the size of his muscles, add to his bodily strength, and
improve his physique, he does so at the expense of his vital organs.
This statement has been freely bandied about by those who ought to
be above such petty and stupid malice; men, who, professing to teach
physical culture, are mostly quite ignorant of the very rudiments of
the subject. Their reasons for such utterances are not far to seek;
they are envious of the success which has attended the years of hard
work and endeavour I have gone through, and regard me as a rival to
damage whom everything is justifiable. One or two have even gone so far
as to say that I myself am anything but sound, that my heart is in a
very bad condition, and that there is every probability of my “going
over to the majority” at a very early age.

Let me nail these outrageous lies to the counter once and for all.
Some who repeat them doubtless do so in good faith; let them listen
and amend their ways. For those who circulated them, well knowing them
to be false, I have no words in which to express my contempt. Fair and
square opposition I can face; but a lie, however groundless, once sent
on its journey is difficult to overtake.

Now for my refutation. First, amongst my pupils have been many who,
prior to coming to me, had been rejected as unsound by Life Insurance
Companies; well, they have got their policies safely locked up now.
Some had weak hearts, some poor lungs, others were generally unfit.
They came to me, generally, for two or three months, applied again,
and were accepted. Those who doubt my word can, as in the case of the
Army lads, see the proofs for themselves. Is that good enough, or does
“our friend, the enemy,” require any further demonstration that, far
from injuring the vital organs, in many cases my system is enormously
beneficial to those who are delicate. If so, here it is. They say _I_
am unsound; very well, here is an answer for them.

Some months ago I was insured for a large sum in the Norwich Union
Life Insurance Company; I was accepted in the _highest class_, and
the doctor who saw me expressed great surprise at the soundness of my
heart, the strength of my lungs, and in fact at the fine condition of
all my organs. Surely these envious people show little ingenuity in
inventing falsehoods which can be so easily disproved.




CHAPTER IV.

HOW TO EXERCISE.


In commencing the system of exercises described and illustrated by
the anatomical chart, there are certain questions which every student
naturally asks himself.

Probably the very first of these questions is, “What part of the day
ought I to devote to these exercises?”

The answer to this question must depend on the pupil himself--on his
leisure and on his inclination. Some persons find the early morning the
best and most convenient time; others prefer the afternoon; and a third
class, again, find that they feel best, and have the most leisure, at
night. I do not, therefore, lay down a hard and fast rule of time. The
golden rule is to select such part of the day as suits you best, always
avoiding exercise immediately after meals. If possible, let two hours
elapse between a meal and exercise. Moreover, do not exercise just
before going to bed if you find it has a tendency to keep you awake.
Many of my pupils find that they sleep much better after exercise; but
there are some upon whom it has a reverse effect.

If possible, the pupil should always exercise stripped to the waist;
if he wear a singlet it should be cut well away round the arms, so as
to allow of free play for the muscles around the shoulder. It is also
desirable to exercise before a looking-glass, for then the movements of
the various muscles can be followed, and to see the muscles at work,
and to mark their steady development, is itself a help and a pleasure.

In performing the exercises the pupil should bend the knees slightly
and keep the muscles of the thighs tense; the legs will thus share in
the benefit of all the movements.

What I wish to impress on delicate pupils is the desirability of
progress by degrees. Many men before beginning my system of physical
training have been so weak that doctors have thought little of the
prospect of saving their lives, yet to-day they are amongst the
strongest. They have progressed gradually, always being careful not
to undertake too much, and thus to adapt the exercises to their own
individual requirements. It may be mentioned also that the old, as
well as the young, may derive great benefits from my system, though
all who are over the age of fifty should moderate the exercises on the
lines suggested in the table of ages for pupils between fifteen and
seventeen. My exercises will also be found of considerable benefit to
persons who suffer from obesity.

Pupils must not be discouraged because, after the first few days’
training, they may feel stiff. It sometimes happens that a young man or
woman, or perhaps a middle-aged one, sets out on the course of training
with the greatest enthusiasm. After the first two or three days the
enthusiasm, perhaps, wears off. Then comes a period of stiffness, and
the pupil is inclined to think that he cannot be bothered to proceed
with the course. To such pupils, I would say, in all earnestness,
“Don’t be overcome by apparent difficulties; if you wish to succeed,
go forward; never draw back.” This stiffness, moreover, becomes a very
pleasant feeling. You soon grow to like it; personally, indeed, it may
be said that it is one of the most agreeable sensations I have ever had.

Frequently pupils ask me how long it should take them to get strong.
The answer again depends on themselves, not only on their physical
constitution, but also on the amount of will power they put into their
exercises. As I have said already, it is the brain that developers the
muscles. Brain will do as much as dumb-bells, even more. For example,
when you are sitting down reading, practise contracting your muscles.
Do this every time you are sitting down leisurely, and by contracting
them harder and harder each time, you will find that it will have
the same effect as the use of dumb-bells or any more vigorous form of
exercise.

It is very advisable for all pupils to get into the habit of constantly
practising this muscle-contraction. In itself it is an admirable
exercise, but it is perhaps even more valuable owing to the fact that
it improves the will power and helps to establish that connection
between the brain and the muscles which is the basis of strength and
“condition.”

It will be noticed that throughout my exercises I make a point of
alternate movements. By this means one arm, or, as the case may be,
one set of muscles, is given a momentary rest whilst the other is
in motion, and thus freer circulation is gained than by performing
the movements simultaneously and the strain upon the heart and lungs
relieved.

Another question which pupils are constantly asking me is whether it
is right for them to perspire after the exercises. The answer to this
question is that it depends on the constitution of the pupil. If you
perspire, it does you good; if you do not it shows that your condition
is sound already. Of course it will be understood that I am answering
in this, as in other questions, for general cases. There are always
exceptions.

Again, “What,” it is asked, “are the general benefits of the Sandow
system of physical training?”

The benefits are not, of course, confined to the visible muscular
development. The inner organs of the body also share them. The
liver and kidneys are kept in good order, the heart and nerves are
strengthened, the brain and energy are braced up. The body, in fact,
like a child, wants to be educated, and only through a series of
exercises can this education be given. By its aid the whole body is
developed and, as will be seen, pupils who have conscientiously worked
at my system testify freely to the good results obtained, not only in
the direction of vastly increasing their muscular strength, but of
raising the standard of their vitality and general health.

For the beginner the most difficult part of my system is so fully to
concentrate his mind on his muscles as to get them absolutely under
control. It will be found, however, that this control comes by degrees.
The brain sends a message to the muscles; the nerves receive it, and
pass it on to them. With regard to the will power that is exerted it
should be remembered that whilst the effect of weight lifting is to
contract the muscles, the same effect is produced by merely contracting
the muscles without lifting the weight.

This question of “will power” has, I am aware, troubled a good many
of my pupils. The majority find it difficult to “put all they know”
into movements with small dumb-bells, and consequently are apt to be
disappointed at the results of their work. Not infrequently I have
received a letter stating that the writer is doing the exercises an
immense number of times, occupying several hours a day--three or
four or even more!--and yet does not find that there is very much
improvement. The reason is obvious; he is simply “going through” the
motions and not really working at them. On the other hand, here and
there, I come across a man possessing an amount of will power out of
all proportion to his strength. The consequence is that he soon gets
exhausted, and either cannot get through his exercises or only does so
at the cost of becoming thoroughly done up and jaded. The great rule
that progress in the direction of the exertion of will power should be
gradual and ever continuing, is one that many people confess they are
unable to carry out.

Now I have for long been perplexed to find a means of remedying this,
and at last I think I have discovered a method whereby the amount of
will-power exerted by the pupil can be regulated. In the next chapter
particulars are given of my new “Grip” Dumb-bell, which I think ought
to prove a veritable godsend to all, and especially to those to whom
reference has just been made.




CHAPTER V.

MY “GRIP” DUMB-BELL.


This appliance is very simple and may be described in a few words. It
consists of a dumb-bell made in two halves separated about an inch
and a half from one another, the intervening space being occupied by
a small steel spring. When exercising, the spring is compressed by
gripping the bells and bringing the two halves close together, in which
position they are kept until the exercise is over. The springs can be
of any strength, and consequently the power necessary to keep the two
halves together can be varied to any extent.

The advantages of this arrangement are obvious. Whether he will or
no, the pupil _must grip_ the bells hard, and as the strength of the
springs are known he can regulate his progress to a nicety as he grows
stronger. There is also another point in connection with the new
device to which I want to draw particular attention. It will often
happen that a pupil who is exercising will feel “a bit off-colour” one
day, and consequently less inclined to exercise, or he may be worried
and perplexed by his business affairs to a degree which lenders it
almost impossible for him to concentrate his mind solely upon the
work. The natural consequence of either of these two conditions is
that unless he possess very uncommon will power, if he is exercising
with ordinary bells, he only does so in a desultory and half-hearted
manner, and benefits little thereby. Now this is impossible with the
“grip” bell--however preoccupied and worried the pupil may be he
has a definite point upon which to concentrate his mind; he _must_
exert a certain amount of force in gripping the bells to keep the two
halves together, and consequently _must_ put out a certain amount of
will-power.

Of course there is no reason why in using the “grip” dumb-bells, only
the grip necessary to keep the two halves together should be exerted.
On the contrary, as with ordinary bells, a man may, and should put “all
he knows” into the work; the special point and the great merit about
the former is that with them the amount of power exerted can never fall
below a known and easily regulated _minimum_.

The pupil who possesses these bells will find that instead of having
to be continually buying heavier dumb-bells, one pair will suffice him
for all time. All that it will be necessary for him to do will be to
purchase, at a small expense, new springs from time to time. All pupils
are advised to use the dumb-bell, upon the merits of which I need not
further enlarge. As will have been seen, this is not a mechanical
device which will render unnecessary the employment of will-power; that
would be opposed to all my theories and teaching. On the contrary it
will aid in developing will-power, as it will stimulate the pupil to
put it forth, and guide him how to use it in the proper direction.




CHAPTER VI.

THE MAGIC COLD BATH.


I am sometimes accused of being a bit of a faddist about the use of the
cold bath, and possibly the heading of this chapter may give strength
to that opinion. But its exhilarating and health-giving effects really
justify the use of the adjective. The longer I live, and the greater my
experience, the more am I convinced of its virtues. Let me advise every
pupil after exercising, while the body is still hot, to take a cold
bath. It does not matter how much he may be perspiring; the cold bath
will prove exceedingly beneficial. He must be careful, however, not to
take his bath if he is out of breath. The exercises will, no doubt,
quicken the heart’s action; but in from three to five minutes after the
series is completed, the heart should be beating normally again. For
persons who suffer from weak heart I should not advise a cold bath.
As a general rule there is no need to ask the question, “Is my heart
weak?” For if it is weak you should know it beyond a doubt. After every
little exertion, though the assertion may appear paradoxical, you will
feel it beating in your head.

In advising cold baths, I speak, of course, for persons in the
enjoyment of ordinary health. The bath should be begun in the summer
and continued every morning throughout the year. In the winter, if the
room is cold, light the gas and close the window. If your hair is not
injuriously affected by cold water--and in many cases, I believe, cold
water will be found to strengthen it--begin, as you stand over the
bath, by splashing the water five and twenty times over your head. In
any case, if you are averse to wetting the hair, be careful to begin by
sponging the temples and nape of the neck. Next, whilst still standing
over the bath, splash the water fifteen times against the chest and
ten times against the heart. Then jump into the bath, going right down
under the water. In the summer you may remain in the water from ten to
fifteen seconds, but in the winter let it be just a jump in and out
again.

The subsequent rub down with towels is popularly supposed to produce
half the benefits that result from a cold bath. I have no hesitation
in saying that this is a great mistake. Let me explain the reason: As
you get out of the bath you rub down first one part of the body and
then the other, and thus, whilst the one part is being warmed by the
friction, the other is getting cold. Many people who take cold baths
in this way complain of touches of rheumatism, and the whole trouble
arises, I believe, from different parts of the body being alternately
warmed and chilled.

In order to overcome the risk of this ill-effect my advice is this:
Do not spend any time over rubbing yourself down. If you do not like
the idea of getting into your clothes wet, just take the water off the
body as quickly as you possibly can with a dry towel, jump into your
clothes, and let Nature restore your circulation in her own way. You
will get quite as warm by this method as by vigorously rubbing down,
with the added advantage that the heat of the body will be more evenly
distributed. If, owing to poor health or other exceptional causes, the
circulation is not fully and promptly restored, walk briskly up and
down the room. If you should still feel cold in any part of the body
probably the bath is not suited to your constitution, and in that case
it is not advised. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, however, the
cold bath, taken as I have described, will have nothing but the most
beneficial effects; and, if taken every morning throughout the year,
it is the surest preventive that I know against catching cold. On the
other hand, irregularity is liable to produce cold. In short, having
once begun the cold bath, make a rule, summer and winter, never to
leave it off.

Personally, I find the very best form of the cold bath is to get
into your clothes after it without drying the body at all. For the
first moment or two the sensation may not be perfectly agreeable, but
afterwards you feel better and warmer for adopting this method. The
damp is carried away through the clothes and no particle of wet is left.

For pupils who have not the convenience of a bathroom a cold sponging
down may be recommended as a substitute. In this case let two towels
be taken and soaked with water. Rub the front of the body down with
one, and the back with the other. This method prevents the towel
from absorbing the heat from the body, and the cold sponging is thus
distributed evenly over its surface. Afterwards dry the body quickly as
before, letting no time be lost in getting into your clothes.

I have often been asked whether in the event of exercising at night it
is advisable to take a cold bath afterwards. My reply is:—“certainly.”
_Always_ have a cold bath or sponge down after exercising. It will
make you feel “as fresh as paint,” improve your appetite, and make
the skin clean and firm, and be generally conducive to happiness and
good health. Some people tell me that a cold bath immediately before
retiring keeps them awake; if that be so, I should advise them to
exercise earlier in the day. But the exercise and the cold bath ought
to be regarded as inseparable.




CHAPTER VII.

PHYSICAL CULTURE FOR THE MIDDLE-AGED.


It is scarcely necessary for me to say that the benefits to be obtained
by conscientiously working upon my system are by no means confined to
the young and vigorous. On the contrary, it is particularly suitable
for the middle-aged, who are all too apt to suffer from the effects of
the period of physical indolence which has succeeded their youthful
activity. To such, the system should prove invaluable. It is quite
a false notion to suppose that when once youth is passed exercise
is no longer necessary. _So long as life lasts, if an individual
wants to keep healthy, exercise is just as necessary as food._ It is
through neglecting to recognise this that so many men become aged
before their time. When a man begins to get into middle life he has
a natural tendency to “take things easy.” He lives more luxuriously,
devotes more time to the pleasures, of the table, and exerts himself
as little as possible. Is it anything to wonder at that his health
suffers, that he grows fat and flabby, and that his digestive apparatus
quickly gets out of gear? If in his youth he has been an athlete the
more will his changed mode of life tell upon him; it is indeed better
never to have exercised at all than to exercise for a few years and
then drop it entirely. It is for this reason we hear of the health
of so many athletes failing them at a comparatively early age. And
this failure is, as a rule, erroneously ascribed to the effects upon
their constitution of their early efforts. Once and again errors in
“training” may be responsible for poor health in middle-age, but in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred the complete cessation from active
bodily work, combined with the greater indulgence which naturally
follows, is alone responsible.

Of course, while it is advisable that the middle-aged man should
exercise regularly, I must warn him not to do too much. He must
remember that what is perfectly safe and prudent at five-and-twenty may
be rash and hazardous at fifty; in short, that he, while exercising
consistently and steadily, must be careful not to over-tax his powers.
If he bears this in mind he will find that the discomforts and ailments
which he has perhaps got to regard as natural to his time of life are
quickly banished, and that, in spite of his grey beard and thinning
hair, it is still “good to be alive.”




CHAPTER VIII.

PHYSICAL CULTURE FOR WOMEN.


I am exceedingly anxious to remove the impression, which has, I fear,
gained ground, that my system is not a thing for women. Now-a-days,
when women have practically freed themselves from the antiquated
ideas of a generation or so ago, there ought to be small difficulty
in convincing them that to make the best of themselves, in a physical
sense, is just as imperative a duty for them as for their brothers.
Women go in for all sorts of sports and pastimes to-day; they bicycle,
row, play tennis and hockey, and not infrequently display no small
degree of excellence in sports which have hitherto been regarded as
“for men only.” This is a hopeful sign, but I am not at all sure that
in many cases it is not more provocative of harm than good. Women
are possessed of a great amount of nervous energy, and, unless their
bodies and organs are gradually and systematically trained to bear
exertion and fatigue, they are likely to attempt performances which
are quite beyond their physical power, although, buoyed up as they are
by a fund of nervous energy and mental exhilaration, they may observe
no ill-effects at the time. This is one reason why it is so advisable
for women to commence by working upon my system, which is so mild and
gradual that they can pursue it without any risks, and, while daily
growing stronger and healthier, be scarcely conscious that they are
making any effort whatever.

I am quite aware that there is a very wide-spread notion that
exercise tends to coarsen and render a woman unbeautiful, but that is
absolutely false. Were there any truth in it I should indeed despair
of converting my fair readers to my way of thinking, for truly it is
woman’s mission to look beautiful. But the idea is absurd; Nature,
which intended woman to look lovely, also intended her to be healthy;
indeed, the two are practically synonymous. Of course, improper,
violent and one-sided exercise will naturally result in making a
woman clumsy, heavy, and ungraceful, but proper exercise, having for
its object symmetrical and perfect development, will have an exactly
contrary effect. Curiously enough, the visible effect of proper
exercise upon a woman’s muscles is not precisely the same as upon those
of a man. Regular and gradually progressive exercise will not make a
woman’s muscles prominent, but will cause them to grow firm and round
and impart to the outline of the figure those graceful contours which
are so universally admired. Without well-conditioned muscle the most
beautifully proportioned woman in the world will look comparatively
shapeless and flabby; her muscles are not required to show up as in
the case of a man’s, but they must be there all the same as a solid
foundation for the overlying flesh. Take a woman’s arm, for instance;
if it has been duly exercised and developed, it is easy enough to see
that its shapeliness and good modelling are due to the muscles; white
and soft though the skin may be, you can tell at a glance that it is
firm and elastic to the touch. On the other hand, the arm of the woman
who has never exercised the muscles, betrays the fact unmistakably;
it may be plump and round, but its lines are lacking in beauty, its
movements in grace; and so with the figure generally.

       ———————————————

The effects of my system are very rapidly noticeable. It reduces the
size of the waist, makes the limbs round, the figure pliant, the walk
and carriage graceful and easy. For those women who are doomed to a
more or less sedentary life it works wonders, and those whose means and
occupation permit of their indulging in a healthier outdoor life will
find it a splendid preparation for their favourite pastimes.

Just a word with regard to complexion. A fine skin and a good healthy
colour are the best proofs of the possession of good health. Indeed,
without health a good skin and complexion are out of the question; and
where is the woman who does not desire to possess both? She is indeed
rare. Therefore, to those women who, while they do not set a high
enough value upon health and strength for their own sakes, yet desire
to be fair to look upon, I say the two things must inevitably go hand
in hand. Whether your prime object be to obtain beauty or health does
not matter; by working upon my system you will obtain both.




CHAPTER IX.

THE TABLES OF AGES.


From the following tables pupils of all ages will be able to see at a
glance how many times the movements of each exercise illustrated by the
anatomical chart should be practised daily.

It should be clearly understood that the tables are only intended as
a guide, and that they are not intended to arbitrarily fix the amount
of work which the pupil should do. It is an absolute impossibility to
lay down rules which will suit every individual case, and consequently
pupils must, after taking the table as a basis, use their own
discretion as to how they shall vary them. The great thing to bear
in mind is to proceed very gradually; while exercising, put “all you
know” into the work, but don’t attempt to do too much. Exercise until
the muscles ache, but never go on to the point of feeling thoroughly
“blown” and exhausted. A quarter of an hour’s conscientious work is
better than an hour spent in “going through the motions” in a desultory
fashion. Pupils who are in any difficulty and wish for special guidance
are advised to go in for the 2s. 6d. course of instruction by post
which is given in connection with “Physical Culture,” full particulars
of which are given in this book. As I have already said, I should
advise all pupils to use the “Grip” dumb-bell; then, instead of buying
a heavier pair of dumb-bells after the exercises are being done a
certain number of times, all that will be necessary will be to use
a stronger spring. I do not advise pupils to keep on with the same
weight bells or the same spring too long; when the exercises are done
a very great number of times the work becomes monotonous and there is
a natural tendency to do it in a mechanical manner. Roughly speaking,
when it takes much over half-an-hour to get through the whole series it
is desirable to begin again with heavier bells or springs.

Parents who desire to see their little ones grow into well-developed
men and women may be advised to buy their babies light wooden
dumb-bells as playthings. The exercises themselves, of course, should
not be attempted until the child has reached the age of six or seven.
Parents especially would do well to remember, as has already been said,
that the tables are only intended as a guide, and they should exercise
their own discretion with regard to the weight of bells used by their
children, and the number of times the exercises should be done. In some
cases a girl or boy of ten years may be so delicate as to have no more
strength than a more sturdy child two or three years younger; in such
cases the table for the younger child should be adhered to. From that
age onwards be guided in the amount of practice by the tables. In order
that every reader may understand the exercises easily, the leading
muscles only are mentioned in the chart.

Pupils should guard against over-exertion; and, above all things,
should not exercise violently. It will be found convenient to let each
arm (not both arms) move once in a second. Thus, for example, the time
of ten movements with each arm of the first exercise would be twenty
seconds. As a general rule, this time will be found to give just the
exercise that is needed. Faster movements are not recommended for
either young or old. Be careful also not to jerk the movements. Always
exercise easily and gracefully, and when contracting the muscles take
care _not to hold the breath_. Many pupils are inclined to do this
unconsciously when bringing their minds to bear upon the muscles, but
it is quite wrong, and the tendency must be striven against until it is
overcome. In one or two exercises, as will be seen on the chart, there
are special instructions with regard to the breath; in all the others
the breathing should be perfectly natural.

                               TABLE 1.

                      FOR CHILDREN OF BOTH SEXES
                  BETWEEN THE AGES OF SEVEN AND TEN.

                 (_Using one pound dumb-bells only._)


When the _maximum_ has been reached, the child should _continue_ to use
the same weight bells and the same spring in the “Grip” dumb-bell until
it arrives at the age at which it can follow Table No. 2, and so on
with the other tables.


                                                     Increase
     No. of            No. of                     of Movements.
    Exercise.         Movements                 (Not to exceed 30
  (See Chart.)      with each arm.             for No. 1, and other
                                             Exercises in proportion.)

      1                  10                    One every three days.

      2                   5                     ”    ”       ”

      3                   5                     ”    ”       ”

      4                   4                    One every five days.

      5                   4                     ”    ”       ”

      6                  10                    One every three days.

      7                   6                    One every five days.

              Exercises 8, 9, and 10 are not advised
                        for young children.

     11                   5                    One every five days.

     12                   5                     ”    ”       ”

     13                   1                    One every fortnight.

     14                   5                    One every three days.

     15                   3                    One every fortnight.

     16   (boys only)     3                     ”    ”       ”

     17                  10                    One every three days.

     18                  10                     ”    ”       ”


                               TABLE 2.

                      FOR CHILDREN OF BOTH SEXES
                  BETWEEN THE AGES OF TEN AND TWELVE.

                 (_Using two pound dumb-bells only._)

                                                   Increase
                                                of Movements.
   No. of            No. of                 (Not to exceed 40 for
  Exercise.        Movements.                  No. 1, and other
                                           Exercises in proportion.)

    1                  10                    One every three days.

    2                   5                     ”    ”       ”

    3                   5                     ”    ”       ”

    4                   4                    One every five days.

    5                   4                     ”    ”       ”

    6                  10                    One every three days.

    7                   6                    One every five days.

       Exercises 8, 9, and 10 are not advised.

   11                   5                    One every five days.

   12                   5                     ”    ”       ”

   13                   1                    One every fortnight.

   14                   6                    One every three days.

   15                   3                    One every fortnight.

        Exercises 16 and 17 are not advised.

   16   (boys only)     3                    One every fortnight.

   17                  10                    One every three days.

   18                  10                     ”    ”       ”


                               TABLE 3.

                      FOR CHILDREN OF BOTH SEXES
                BETWEEN THE AGES OF TWELVE AND FIFTEEN.

                (_Using three pound dumb-bells only._)

                                                Increase
                                             of Movements.
   No. of             No. of              (Not to exceed 50 for
  Exercise.        Movements.               No. 1, and other
                                        Exercises in proportion.)

    1                  10                 One every three days.

    2                   5                  ”    ”       ”

    3                   5                  ”    ”       ”

    4                   4                 One every five days.

    5                   4                  ”    ”       ”

    6                  10                 One every three days.

    7                   6                 One every five days.

       Exercises 8, 9, and 10 are not advised.

   11                   5                 One every five days.

   12                   5                  ”    ”       ”

   13                   1                 One every fortnight.

   14                   6                 One every three days.

   15                   3                 One every fortnight.

   16    (boys only)    3                  ”    ”       ”

   17                  15                 One every three days.

   18                  10                  ”    ”       ”


                               TABLE 4.

                               FOR GIRLS
              BETWEEN THE AGES OF FIFTEEN AND SEVENTEEN.

                (_Using three pound dumb-bells only._)

                                                Increase
                                             of Movements.
   No. of            No. of               (Not to exceed 60 for
  Exercise.        Movements.               No. 1, and other
                                        Exercises in proportion.)

    1                  15                 One every three days.

    2                   8                  ”      ”       ”

    3                   6                  ”      ”       ”

    4                   6                 One every five days.

    5                   4                  ”      ”       ”

    6                  10                 One every three days.

    7                   8                 One every five days.

       Exercises 8, 9, and 10 are not advised.

   11                   5                 One every five days.

   12                   5                  ”      ”       ”

   13                   1                 One every fortnight.

   14                   8                 One every three days.

   15                   3                 One every fortnight.

       Exercise 16 is not advised.

   17                  15                 One every fortnight.

   18                  15                  ”    ”   three days.


                               TABLE 5.

                               FOR BOYS
              BETWEEN THE AGES OF FIFTEEN AND SEVENTEEN.

              (_Using at first three-pound dumb-bells._)

 At this age boys, when they have increased the number of movements of
  the first exercise from 30 to 60, and all others in proportion, are
recommended to go through the course again with five pound dumb-bells.

   No. of            No. of                Increase
  Exercise.        Movements.            of Movements.

    1                 30              One every other day.

    2                 15              One every three days.

    3                 10               ”           ”

    4                  8               ”           ”

    5                  5              One every three days.

    6                 12              One every three days.

    7                  8              One every three days.

            Exercises 8, 9, and 10 are not advised.

   11                  5              One every two days.

   12                  5               ”           ”

   13                  2              One a week.

   14                 15              One every other day.

   15                  3              One every three days.

   16                  3              One every fortnight.

   17                 25              One every three days.

   18                 25               ”           ”


                               TABLE 6.

                              FOR GIRLS.
                OF SEVENTEEN YEARS OF AGE AND UPWARDS.

                (_Using three-pound dumb-bells only._)

                                              Increase
                                            of Movements.
   No. of            No. of             (Not to exceed 80 for
  Exercise.        Movements.             No. 1 and other
                                      exercises in proportion).

    1                  20               One every other day.

    2                  10               One every three days.

    3                   7                ”      ”       ”

    4                   7                ”      ”       ”

    5                   4               One every three days.

    6                  10               One every two days.

    7                   8               One every three days.

         8, 9, and 10 until the pupil feels tired.

   11                  5               One every two days.

   12                  5                ”      ”       ”

   13                  1               One a week.

   14                 10               One every three days.

   15                  3                ”      ”       ”

              Exercise 16 is not advised.

   17                 20              One every three days.

   18                 20               ”      ”       ”


                               TABLE 7.

                              FOR YOUTHS.
                OF SEVENTEEN YEARS OF AGE AND UPWARDS.

               (_Using at first four-pound dumb-bells._)

When the pupil has increased the number of movements of No. 1 to 80,
he should keep at the maximum with the same weight dumb-bells for six
months; he may then increase 1lb., beginning the course over again, and
so on every six months. The heaviest bells used, however, should not
exceed 10lbs.

I am aware that in the former edition of the book I placed 20lbs. as
the limit, but the experience gained in my schools has taught me that
for the _majority_ of men this is far too heavy. It is always better
to use bells too light than too heavy; the latter are liable to cause
strains and other injuries.

   No. of            No. of             Increase
  Exercise.        Movements.         of Movements.


    1                 50             Five every day.

    2                 25             Two every day.

    3                 10             One every day.

    4                 10             One every three days.

    5                  5             One every two days.

    6                 15              ”     ”     ”

    7                 10              ”     ”     ”

         8, 9, and 10 until the pupil feels tired.

   11                  10              One every two days.

   12                  10              ”     ”     ”

   13                   3              One every three days.

   14                  25              Two every day.

   15                   3              One every two days.




CHAPTER X.

MY SCHOOLS OF PHYSICAL CULTURE.


The reader of the second part of this book will see how my professional
career was thrust upon me. It came through no seeking of my own, after
my defeat of Samson. I accepted it partly because the offers seemed
too good to be thrown away, and partly because they enabled me to
gratify a wish to see something of the world. My ambition, however, was
always to form and build up a system for the service of others, rather
than exhibit merely the results of that system in my own person. That
ambition, I hope, is to be realised, for I have founded several schools
of training for men, women, and children of both sexes, and in the
course of time, I intend to establish branches in every important town.

The schools are conducted entirely on my own system of physical
culture. Instruction is given by specially qualified teachers, and
every exercise is lucidly described and clearly demonstrated. The
pupils have every opportunity of developing their bodies to the highest
extent, and from time to time I personally examine them.

The instructors employed in the school have been specially trained
for their work by me, so that the pupils have the benefit of my best
information, and of thus learning the whole of my system exactly. In
addition to the classes for men, women, and children, arrangements are
made for giving private lessons when required.

My brother-in-law, Mr. Warwick Brookes, jun., is the best pupil I have
ever had. For the past six years he has followed my system thoroughly,
and the results have been remarkable. When I first met him he was
exceedingly delicate. He could only walk with the aid of crutches.
Gradually, however, he began to improve, and under my personal
supervision, by the help of my system, his strength has so increased
that to-day he is like a new man.

By means of the schools I hope to do something to substantially aid the
physical development of this and succeeding generations. Letters from
past pupils testify to the great benefits which can be derived from
careful training under my system, and if the training has the further
advantage of individual instruction those benefits should be increased
even more than by studying this book.

It is a pleasant ambition to hope by one’s efforts to leave the world
just a little better here and there than one found it; and that has
always been and is my ambition. My pupils can help me to realise it.

As I have said, I intend opening schools in every large town in the
country; at present schools are open at the following addresses:—

         {32, St. James’s Street, S.W.
         {115A, Ebury Street, S.W.
  LONDON {Walbrook, City, E.C.
         {Tottenham Court Road, W.
         {Crystal Palace, S.E.

  MANCHESTER:—Oxford Street.




CHAPTER XI.

INSTRUCTION BY CORRESPONDENCE.


None of my departments has shown a more gratifying development than has
the correspondence department. Letters pour in from all parts of the
world asking for advice and instruction in such numbers that I have
been obliged to organise a special system and department for dealing
with the enquiries of my many friends, who, owing to their living at a
distance and to other reasons, cannot attend the schools personally.

Every week many letters reach me from the Colonies alone--from India,
Canada, Australia, South Africa--even from distant Klondike--and
from one and all I have received flattering testimonials as to the
benefits they have derived from following my instructions. This is an
example:--Mr. Dunbar, of Queensland, writes:—

 “Dear Mr. Sandow,

 “I cannot express my gratitude for the wonderful benefit I have
 derived from your three months’ course of instruction. Previous to
 practising your system I was a chronic dyspeptic, and owing to my
 sedentary occupation, for many years I had not known what it was
 to feel the natural exhilaration and energy of a healthy man. Now
 I honestly believe that there is not a healthier man in the whole
 Colony.”

One pleasing feature of this undertaking is the steady increase in the
number of applications from ladies. This department has already become
the most important part of my work, and anyone wishing to keep in touch
with my system of Physical Culture can do so by forwarding to me their
measurements, sex, age, and occupation. In the case of any physical
peculiarity, or organic weakness, a doctor should be consulted, and
the result of his examination stated in the letter of communication. A
form is inserted at the end of this book as a guide to those wishing to
apply. These forms are dealt with by myself and each case receives my
individual consideration and instruction, and is signed by me.




CHAPTER XII.

SANDOW’S CHART OF MEASUREMENTS.


The figure will show pupils how to take their own measurements. They
are advised to keep a careful record of these month by month, so
they can see how they are progressing. The chest should be measured
both with the lungs full of air and empty, as well as in its normal
condition.

                    _Date when training commenced._

  .....................................................

                    _Date on completion of course._

  .....................................................


          _Measurements then._      _Measurements now._

  _Age_
  _Weight_
  _Height_
  _Neck_
  _Chest Contracted_
  _Chest Expanded_
  _Upper Right Arm_
  _Upper Left Arm_
  _Forearm, Right_
  _Forearm, Left_
  _Waist_
  _Thigh, Right_
  _Thigh, Left_
  _Calf, Right_
  _Calf, Left_


[Illustration: Showing the positions of measurement]




CHAPTER XIII.

THE COMBINED DEVELOPER.


After considerable experience and exhaustive experiments with rubber
machines, I have succeeded in inventing one which allows of a
combination of dumb-bell and rubber exercises.

Exclusive rubber exercise has not the effect of producing hard, firm,
and supple muscles, therefore I have patented the detachable dumb-bell
handles, which are simplicity itself.

This developer can be so regulated as to prove equally beneficial to a
weak man as to myself.

From an economic point of view it stands alone, as at a small outlay a
Developer can be purchased, which is sufficient for a whole family, and
constitutes an entire athletic outfit.

The detachable rubbers and handles allow of the machine to be fixed up
to any tension, so that as one becomes stronger, one has ample scope
for gradually increasing one’s strength. The fatal drawback to the
ordinary rubber exerciser is that it only proves beneficial up to a
certain point, and then it is not sufficient to carry one any further.
Consequently one has to make another outlay in purchasing a heavier
machine. My Developer has been designed to obviate this, as it can be
regulated up to any strength.

The machine is simply made and easily fixed, causing no damage to the
door or wall to which it is attached. There being no pulleys, no oiling
is required, and there is no friction to wear out the covering of the
cords. Thus the Developer is very durable.

Charts, illustrating Chest Expander, Dumb-bell and Developer exercises,
together with a pair of nickel-plated dumb-bells, are given free with
each machine. The dumb-bells being detachable can be used separately
for the exercises as prescribed in this book. The exercises are
specially arranged by myself, introducing several of the movements in
my system of development which cannot be properly executed on any other
machine.

In the charts are included special exercises for strengthening the
legs; many pupils have found this very beneficial.

[Illustration: The above illustration shows the Developer as a Rubber
Exerciser, Chest Expander, and Dumb-bells.]

The great value of the Developer lies in the fact that it serves to
render the muscles pliable, and the whole body flexible and supple.
Certain movements with it, too, are difficult to perform satisfactorily
with dumb-bells alone. I recommend pupils to use the dumb-bells
and complete Developer alternately; by this means I find the most
satisfactory results are obtained. Exercise with the rubber Developer
affords a welcome change from work with the dumb-bells.




CHAPTER XIV.

HEAVY WEIGHT-LIFTING.


It is not my purpose in this book to give anything beyond general
directions for lifting heavy weights. You can become thoroughly strong
and enjoy perfect health by means of the series of exercises already
described. Heavy weight-lifting requires personal instruction; that
instruction will be given to those who may desire it at my schools.
Under qualified instructors it may be pursued without the risk of
danger.

Generally, however, it may be observed that to lift heavy weights it is
desirable first to see what weight can be used without undue strain.
Slowly raise this weight from your shoulder over your head, or, if from
the ground, raise it somewhat more quickly. See how many times you are
able to raise the weight first selected, and when you can perform the
exercise with comparative ease, raising it, say, ten times, up to 80
lbs., six times from 80 to 100, and afterwards three times, increase
the weight for the next day’s exercise by five pounds. Continue this
increase as you grow more capable, remembering always to bring the left
hand into play as well as the right; at the same time, though it should
not be neglected, avoid overtaxing the left side.

The great thing to remember is to go slowly. Avoid anything like
spasmodic efforts, and endeavour before trying a lift to thoroughly
think out the different movements. Weight-lifting should never be
practised in a confined space or where the weight cannot be readily
dropped. To attempt to hold on to a weight after the balance has been
lost may result in serious strains and other injuries; the pupil should
practice dropping a weight from any position safely and gracefully.
If the pupil bear these few hints in mind he will come to no harm,
but, as I have said, weight-lifting is best left alone until it can be
practised under the personal supervision of an experienced instructor.

       ———————————————

                          A PLEASING TRIBUTE.

The following letter was written me by Colonel Fox, late Her Majesty’s
Inspector of Army Gymnasia, a gentleman to whom I am very greatly
indebted for the interest he has taken for years past in my work and
for the zeal he has shown in getting the system introduced into the
British Army:—

                                        The Gymnasium. Aldershot.
                                             29th July, 1893.

 Dear Mr. Sandow,

 I am in receipt of your letter from New York which reached me on the
 23rd instant, and am very glad to hear of your success in America.
 The book you speak of as being about to be published should also be
 very successful, and ought to do much towards making your system of
 physical development widely known.[1] Since your last visit to us here
 my Staff Instructors and non-commissioned officers under training have
 been energetically practicing the light dumb-bell exercises you so
 kindly showed them.

 I am convinced that your series of exercises are excellent and most
 carefully thought out, with a comprehensive view to the development of
 the body as a _whole_. Any man honestly following out your clear and
 simple instructions could not fail to enormously and rapidly improve
 his physique.

 It is almost superfluous for me to add that you yourself, in _propria
 persona_, are the best possible advertisement of the merits of your
 system of training and developing of the human body.

 Any individual gifted with a fair amount of determination,
 is absolutely certain to develop his physical powers at an
 extraordinarily rapid rate and with the most happy results to his
 general health and mental powers and activity, by following with
 intelligence your system. As you very rightly say, it is only by
 bringing the brain to bear upon our exercises that we can hope to
 produce the best results with the shortest possible expenditure of
 time.

 The absence of expensive and cumbrous apparatus is no small
 recommendation of your system, and you are thoroughly in the right
 when you assert that lasting muscular development, and consequent
 strength, can be best produced by the constant and energetic use of
 light dumb-bells, employed in a sound and scientific manner.

  Believe me, yours very truly,
  (Signed) G. M. Fox, Lieut.-Colonel,
  H.M. Inspector of Gymnasia in Great Britain.

 Professor Eugen Sandow, New York, U.S.A.

[1] The book referred to is the large one which was published some
years ago, and which is now out of print.




LETTERS AND PHOTOGRAPHS OF PUPILS.


In the following pages will be found a selection from many thousands
of letters which have been addressed to me by pupils who have already
profited from my system of Physical Culture. Attention is specially
directed to the measurements before and after training, showing the
actual progress made in muscular development.


  VACHWEN,
  MARLBOROUGH ROAD,
  WATFORD,
  _March 11th, 1899_.

  MR. SANDOW.
DEAR SIR,

 _I have just completed a course of lessons at your “School of Physical
 Culture,” from which I have derived untold benefit. Through the
 greater part of last year I was so ill that for some time it was
 feared I might go into consumption. I was medically treated, and at
 length permitted by my doctor to try what your exercises would do._

 _I entered your School with weak heart, weak lungs, digestion sadly
 impaired. After three lessons, with persistent home work, I began very
 slowly to gain strength and an appetite, and now, at the end of my
 course, I am quite a new creature--full of vitality and energy._

 _The upper part of the lung, which was the chief cause of my trouble,
 is quite healed and healthy. I never know now what it is to feel pain
 and tightness in the bronchial tubes, from which I constantly suffered
 in the past. My digestive organs too are quite well._

 I have gained in weight                          7 lbs.
   ”       ”   round the neck 1 in.
   ”       ”   in the chest (contracted)          3½ ins.
   ”       ”     ”      ”   (expanded)            4  ins.
   ”       ”     ”    forearm                     2½ ins.
   ”       ”     ”    upper arm                   2½ ins.
   ”       ”    in lung capacity                 100 cbc. ins.

 _I should be quite pleased to be of use to you at any time in
 recommending to weak ones, who may be timid to commence the work, the
 immense benefit to be derived from it, by my own personal experience.
 I should like also to mention the very kind and careful treatment
 I have received both from your Manager, Mr. Clease, and the Class
 Instructor. They give the weak ones their particular attention, so
 that in working one is never over-worked._

  _I remain,
  Yours gratefully_,
  MARY E. S. ADAMS.


EBURY STREET SCHOOL.

COPY OF MEASUREMENT SHEET.

_Name_:—MISS ADAMS.

_Address_:--Marlborough Road, Watford.

_Result of Medical Examination_:—“Very Bad.”

_Nature of Illness_:—“The doctors say consumption.”

_Remarks_:—“This is the weakest case I have ever had to treat.”

                     Before        After          After
                    Training.     6 weeks.      3 months.  Increases.
  Neck                11            11¾           12          1
  Chest Contracted    28            30½           31½         3½
    ”   Expanded      30            33             35         5
  Upper Arm, Right     8½           10             11         2½
       ”     Left      8            10             10½        2½
  Fore Arm, Right      8¼            9½            10¾        2½
      ”     Left       8¼            9½            10¼        2
  Waist               22            23             23         1
  Thigh, Right        16            17½            18½        2½
    ”    Left         16            17½            18½        2½
  Calf, Right         10¾           11¼            11¾        1
    ”   Left          10¾           11¼            11¾        1
  Height            5ft. 6in.    5ft. 6½in.    5ft. 7in.    1in.
  Weight            7st. 2lb.    7st. 8lb.      7st. 9lb.   7lb.
  Lung Capacity      100            170            200      100
  Chest Expansion     2              2½             3½        1½


  57, GLOUCESTER TERRACE, W.,

  _March 12th, 1899_.

 DEAR SIR,

 _I am glad to take this opportunity of saying how very much my health
 has benefited in every way from your system of Physical Culture. It
 always gives me great pleasure to recommend the same to my friends._

  _I am_,

  _Yours faithfully_,

  JULIA F. M. JOHNSTON.

E. SANDOW, ESQ.


EBURY STREET SCHOOL.

COPY OF MEASUREMENT SHEET.

_Name_:—MISS J. F. M. JOHNSTON.

_Address_:--57, Gloucester Terrace, W.

                      Before      After      After
                     Training.   6 weeks.   3 months.  Increases.
  Neck                12⅜          13          13¼         ⅞
  Chest Contracted    29½          31          31½        2
    ”   Expanded      32           36½         37         5
  Upper Arm, Right    10           12          12½        2½
       ”     Left     10⅛          12          12½        2⅜
  Fore Arm, Right      9½          10¼         10½        1
      ”     Left       8¾          10¼         10½        1¾
  Waist               24           24          24½         ½
  Thigh, Right        18½          19½         19¾        1¼
    ”    Left         18½          19½         19¾        1¼
  Calf, Right         12           13          13¼        1¼
    ”   Left          12           13          13¼        1¼
  Height            5ft. 4⅜in.   5ft. 4¾in.      —         ⅜
  Weight            8st. 3lb.    8st. 4lb.   8st. 6lb.    3lb.
  Lung Capacity      200            219         222       22
  Chest Expansion     2½             5½          5½        3


[Illustration: THOS. A. FOX.]


  23, CHURCH ROW,
  LIMEHOUSE, E.,
  _December 3rd_.

  MR. E. SANDOW,

  DEAR SIR,

 _I write these few lines to convey to you my thanks and gratitude for
 the boon you have given me and the public at large. I refer to your
 excellent book on how to gain health, muscle, and strength._

 _I procured one about two years ago, and have studied and practised
 the drills incessantly since. The result is far beyond my
 expectations. I am nineteen years of age and small of stature, being
 only five feet in height and seven stone in weight, yet, without
 exaggeration, I can say that my strength and muscular development
 would do credit to a man six feet high._

 _I have gained this solely by your system and cannot praise it too
 highly._

 _Another great advantage over other systems is the small outlay
 required, as I have obtained for a few shillings all that is necessary
 to train with, whereas if I had trained under another system I should
 have had to have made a much larger outlay for apparatus._

 _I enclose a list stating what I have gained in strength and muscle
 since I started training._

 _It will always be a great pleasure to me to answer any questions
 concerning your system, likewise interview anyone who might be
 desirous of seeing me._

  _I remain,
  Yours truly_,
  THOS. A. FOX.


_Name_:—T. A. FOX.

_Address_:--23, CHURCH ROW, LIMEHOUSE, E.

                             MEASUREMENTS.

                 BEFORE TRAINING.   AFTER TRAINING.

  Chest             29 inches          32½ inches
  Chest (expanded)  30   ”             34    ”
  Biceps            10   ”             13    ”
  Forearm            9½  ”             12    ”
  Thigh             16½  ”             20    ”
  Calf              11   ”             13    ”
  Waist             26   ”             26    ”

                          ———————————————

                         HEAVY WEIGHT-LIFTING.

                           BEFORE TRAINING.

                           {Right hand  56lb dumb-bell.
  From ground above        {Left hand   46lb     ”
       head                {Both hands  84lb bar.

  Holding at arm’s length}  Right hand 22lb weight.
  straight from shoulder }  Left hand  20lb   ”

                            ———————————————

             After two years’ training under your system.

                           {Right hand 100lb dumb-bell.
  From ground above        {Left hand   80lb     ”
       head                {Both hands 130lb     ”

  Holding at arm’s length } Right hand 40lb weight.
  straight from shoulder } Left hand  30lb   ”


[Illustration: JOHN P. PETERS. (Before Training.)]


[Illustration: JOHN P. PETERS. (After Training.)]


  MON REPOS,
  66A, HERNE HILL,
  LONDON, S.E.,

  _March 6th_.

  MANAGER CLEASE,

  DEAR SIR,

 _It is just over three years since I started to improve my physical
 power by means of the Sandow system, and I take this opportunity
 of forwarding some photographs taken at different periods. In what
 measure I have succeeded can best be seen by comparison of my original
 efforts and my present attainments, of which I also forward a list.
 Although they are as yet nothing to boast about or sufficiently
 great to be handed down to posterity, they are the result of close
 application to the system Mr. Sandow originated, and by means of
 which, in a few years, I hope to attain the culmination of human
 strength, and, if possible, to rival that of Sandow himself, for I am
 a firm believer in starting with an almost unattainable ideal, then
 gradually coming within measurable distance of it, and eventually,
 perhaps, to reach it. To do this will require the exercise of many
 mental qualities, determination, perseverance, and endurance. I
 suppose there are many young men like myself in whom Mr. Sandow has
 awakened a latent ambition to muscular prowess, and in doing so I
 state without any hesitation that he alone has done as much good for
 the country as any man of the present century._

 _I can only conclude with expressing my deep gratitude to Mr. Sandow
 for the splendid facilities he has offered to those who wish to be
 classed as nature’s men (which is indeed the duty of man), and in
 doing so I am but echoing the sentiments of many of his pupils._

  _I have the honour to be,
  Faithfully yours_,

  JOHN D. PETERS.


                         EBURY STREET SCHOOL.

                            ———————————————

                      COPY OF MEASUREMENT SHEET.

                            ———————————————

_Name_:—JOHN PETERS.

_Address_:--66a, Herne Hill, S.E.

                      Before      After
                      Training.   Course.   Increase.

  Neck                  16          18½        2½
  Chest, contracted     38          40         2
    ”    expanded       44          47         3
  Upper Arm, Right      15¾         17½        1¾
      ”      Left       15          17         2
  Forearm, Right        13          15         2
      ”    Left         12¼         14½        2¼
  Waist                 30          30         —
  Thigh, Right          23½         24½        1
    ”    Left           23¾         24¼         ½
  Calf, Right           15½         16½        1
    ”   Left            15½         16          ½
  Height              5ft. 11in.  6ft. ⅜in.    1¼
  Weight                13 st.    13st. 6lb    6
  Lung Capacity         276         320       44
  Chest Expansion        6           7         1

                            ———————————————

Mr. Peters is a fine weight-lifter, having accomplished the splendid
feat of raising 210lb from the floor to arms’ length above the head,
_using one hand only_. This is probably the amateur record. As he is
only 23 years old there is yet plenty of time for him to far eclipse
even this striking feat.


  30, GUILDFORD STREET,
  RUSSELL SQUARE,
  W.C.,

  _13th March_.

  DEAR SIR,

 _It affords me much pleasure in stating that since I commenced taking
 your course of instruction I have greatly increased in strength and
 physical development--my biceps having increased two inches, and my
 other muscles proportionately. I am convinced that a course of your
 instruction would prove beneficial to any one, whether naturally
 muscular or otherwise. Your system is one of such gradual progression
 that it cannot fail to strengthen the constitution of a person even in
 a delicate state of health. I shall have much pleasure in recommending
 your School of Physical Culture to my friends._

  _Yours sincerely_,

  LESLIE HOOD.

  EUGEN SANDOW, ESQ.


[Illustration: LESLIE HOOD.]


                         EBURY STREET SCHOOL.

                            ———————————————

                      COPY OF MEASUREMENT SHEET.

                            ———————————————

_Name_:—L. HOOD.[2]

_Address_:--30, Guildford St., W.C.

                    Before      After    Increases.
                   Training.   3 months.

  Neck                15         16         1
  Chest Contracted    35½        36         ½
    ”   Expanded      38⅝        42         3⅜
  Upper Arm, Right    13⅞        15¼        1⅜
    ”    ”   Left     13⅞        14¾         ⅞
  Fore Arm, Right     12         13¼        1¼
    ”   ”   Left      11⅞        13         1⅛
  Waist               28½        29½        1
  Thigh, Right        22         22¾         ¾
    ”    Left         21¾        22½         ¾
  Calf, Right         14¾        15          ⅜
    ”   Left          14⅛        14½         ⅜
  Height           5ft. 7¼in.     —         —
  Weight           10st. 8lbs  10st.9lbs.   1
  Lung Capacity       281         —         —
  Chest Expansion     3⅛          6         2⅞

[2] This pupil had been working three months before joining this
school, hence the increases are not so marked as in the case of a
beginner.


[Illustration: ROLAND HASTINGS]


  34, DUKE STREET,
  ST. JAMES’S, S.W.,
  _March 4th, 1899_.

  DEAR MR. SANDOW,

_Not often is it given to us in this life to sow our seed and gather in
the full fruits of the same. Therefore it is with more than ordinary
pleasure that I write this letter to say that with your system of
Physical Culture this extremely satisfactory result is to be obtained._

 _When first I joined your school some four or five months ago I was
 a very fair average specimen of a young Englishman (and our national
 thews and sinews are by no means to be despised), but owing, in a
 great measure, I suppose, to my city life, I had run a little to seed,
 and more than once had required the aid of doctors and tonics. The
 advice of the former invariably ended with the same formula, “take
 more exercise.”_

 _I was quite ready to agree with them, as during my holidays in the
 country, when I was exercising in one form or another nearly the whole
 day, I felt quite a different man and as fit as possible._

 _But work in the city is a little difficult to reconcile with plenty
 of exercise. Some time previously Mr. Sandow had opened his school
 for Physical Culture, and having often admired him and his feats from
 afar, I resolved to go to him._

 _I am a business man, and from a business point of view I never did a
 better stroke of business in my life._

 _I am a mortal being, and speaking from a human point of view I never
 in my life came to a happier conclusion than when I resolved to become
 a pupil of the School of Physical Culture. I have increased in girth
 and weight without scarcely a superfluous ounce of flesh._

 _My working capabilities and staying powers are all doubled, and what
 before was an effort has now become a pleasure. Indigestion, torpid
 lassitudes, rasped nerves, and jaded appetite, are to me now unknown
 quantities._

 _With splendid appetite, long peaceful nights, and wondrous powers
 of vigour and vitality, I can face the world and with a deep sense
 of gratitude say, this is what Mr. Sandow and his system of Physical
 Culture have done for me._

 _Yours sincerely_, ROLAND HASTINGS.

 _P.S.--I may add I am a pupil at the St. James’s Street School._


                      ST. JAMES’S STREET SCHOOL.

                            ———————————————

                      COPY OF MEASUREMENT SHEET.

                            ———————————————

_Name_:—ROLAND HASTINGS.

_Address_:--Southsea House, Threadneedle St., E.C.

                       Before      After     Increases
                      Training.   3 Months.

  Neck                   14½        16¾         2¼
  Chest Contracted       34½        36           1½
    ”   Expanded         36½        43¼          6¾
  Upper Arm, Right       11¾        15           3¼
      ”      Left        11⅝⅝       15           3⅜
  Fore Arm, Right        11⅞        14           2⅛
      ”     Left         11⅞        14           2⅛
  Waist                  29¼        30¾          1½
  Thigh, Right           20½        22½          2
    ”    Left            20½        22½          2
  Calf, Right            13½        14¼           ¾
    ”   Left             13⅝        14¼           ⅝
  Height              5ft. 7½in   5ft. 7½in       —
  Weight             10st. 4lbs   11st. 4lbs     1st.
  Lung Capacity           255          —          —
  Chest Expansion           2         7¼          5¼


[Illustration: A. FOULKES.]


  18, ST. STEPHEN’S ROAD,
  BAYSWATER, W.,
  _March 10th, 1899_.

  DEAR SIR,

 _Your system has certainly done me a lot of good and freshened me up,
 although I can hardly claim to have tested it fairly, as I must plead
 guilty to having done none of the exercises out of the school during
 the three months’ course that I have just concluded there._

 _Attending the school obviates three defects in working by yourself_:—

 (_i._) _You learn--not merely the exercises--but the way to do them._

 (_ii._) _You get an instructor who knows his work, and keeps you at
 yours._

 (_iii._) _You are stimulated by seeing others working in the same
 room._

 _The only disadvantage I can see in the system is that, if rigidly
 followed, you would soon be driven to patronise a fresh tailor._

 _I was warned not to get muscle-bound by taking the course; I now
 cannot see how this can happen, unless you neglect some of the
 exercises entirely. I hope, at some future date, you will receive
 a better account of your system with regard to measurements and
 developments from_

  _Yours truly_,
  ARTHUR FOULKES.


                      ST. JAMES’S STREET SCHOOL.

                            ———————————————

                      COPY OF MEASUREMENT SHEET.

                            ———————————————

_Name_:—A. FOULKES.

ADDRESS:--18, St. Stephen’s Road, Bayswater.

                   Before         After
                  Training.      3 Months.   Increases

  Neck               14⅞           17¼          2⅜
  Chest Contracted   34½           33½          —
    ”   Expanded     38½           42¼          3¾
  Upper Arm, Right   12½           14½          2
     ”       Left    11¾           14¼          2½
  Fore Arm, Right    11¾           13           1¼
     ”      Left     11¾           13           1¼
  Waist              30¼           31½          1¼
  Thigh, Right       22½           24           1½
    ”    Left        22½           24           1½
  Calf, Right        14⅜           14¾           ⅜
    ”   Left         14¼           14¾           ½
  Height             6ft.           6ft.         —
  Weight           12st. 1½lb.   12st. 7lbs.    5½
  Lung Capacity      320            340         20
  Chest Expansion    4              8¾          4¾


  3, BURLINGTON ROAD,
  BAYSWATER, W.,
  _March 10th, 1899_.

  F. A. HANSARD, ESQ.

  DEAR SIR,

 _With regard to my opinion of Mr. Sandow’s system I cannot speak too
 highly of it._

 _I commenced the three months’ course when in poor health, brought
 about by malarial fever, but after attending Mr. Sandow’s school for
 two months I felt better than I had ever done previously._

 _The increase in measurements which you have recorded is the result of
 two hours’ conscientious work a week only._

 _It would be fair to mention that when only 6 lessons remained before
 the completion of the course, my exercises were interrupted owing to a
 broken collar-bone. With better luck, these increases would possibly
 have been greater._

  _I am, Sir_,
  _Yours truly_,
  C. FOULKES.


[Illustration: C. FOULKES.]


                      ST. JAMES’S STREET SCHOOL.

                            ———————————————

                      COPY OF MEASUREMENT SHEET.

                            ———————————————

_Name_:—C. FOULKES.

_Address_:--War Office, Pall Mall.

                   Before         After
                  Training.      3 Months.   Increases.

  Neck               15            16¾          1¾
  Chest Contracted   33            35           2
    ”   Expanded     38            43           5
  Upper Arm, Right   12⅝           14½          1⅞
      ”      Left    12¼           14           1¾
  Fore Arm, Right    11½           13½          2
      ”     Left     11            13⅛          2⅛
  Waist              30½           31            ½
  Thigh, Right       21            23           2
    ”    Left        21            23           2
  Calf, Right        14¼           14¾           ½
    ”   Left         14¼           14¾           ½
  Height           5ft. 9½in.    5ft. 9½in.     —
  Weight          11st. 1½lbs.  11st. 4lbs.     2½
  Lung Capacity     310            373         63
  Chest Expansion     5             8          3


[Illustration: J. A. SINCLAIR.]


  YORK PLACE,
  MANCHESTER,
  _February, 1899_.

  MR. E. SANDOW.

  DEAR SIR,

 _I have much pleasure in enclosing a copy of my measurements taken
 at the end of last December. I am a pupil attending your Manchester
 School, and cannot speak too highly of your system, or the manner in
 which it is taught by your instructors._

  _Wishing you every success_,
  _Believe me_,
  _Yours very sincerely_,
  J. A. SINCLAIR.


                  OXFORD STREET SCHOOL (MANCHESTER).

                            ———————————————

                      COPY OF MEASUREMENT SHEET.

                            ———————————————

_Name_:—J. A. SINCLAIR.

_Address_:--York Place, Manchester.

                                     After
                      Before       3 Months’    Increases.
                     Training.      Course.
                    Sept. 18th,    Dec. 28th,
                       1898.         1898.

  Neck                 14½           15⅞          1⅜
  Chest Contracted[3]  35½           35            ½
    ”   Expanded       37            41¼          4¼
  Upper Arm, Right     14            16⅜          2⅜
       ”     Left      14            16¼          2¼
  Fore Arm, Right      11⅞           14           2⅛
      ”     Left       11⅝           13¾          2⅛
  Waist                31            31            —
  Thigh, Right         22¼           24¾          2½
    ”    Left          21¾           24¼          2½
  Calf, Right          14            14⅞           ⅞
    ”   Left           13¾           14¾          1
  Height            5ft. 5¼in.    5ft. 5½in.       ⅜
  Weight           11st. 6½lbs.  12st. 0lbs.      7½
  Lung Capacity        240              275      35
  Chest Expansion       1½            6¼          4¾

[3] It will be noted that the size of the Chest when contracted is
slightly smaller than before training; this is not unusual, and denotes
that more control has been obtained over the muscles of the chest, and
consequently its walls can be drawn closer together.


[Illustration: HAROLD L. BUTLER.]


  HIGH LAWN,
  BOLTON-LE-MOORS,
  _March 16th, 1899_.

  DEAR MR. SANDOW,

 _After six months training as a pupil at your School of Physical
 Culture (Manchester), I now feel qualified to judge as to the merits
 of your system._

 _For the perfect and symmetrical development of the human form I can
 conceive of nothing which rivals the dumb-bell and rubber exercises as
 taught and practised in your gymnasia._

 _For the promotion of lost health, due to bodily neglect; as a
 cure for insomnia, and many abdominal disorders, it needs no
 recommendation._

 _Concerning my personal improvement, little need be said, sufficient
 to say I never felt better in my life, and recent weight-lifting tests
 have proved me to be possessed of nearly double my former strength._

 _Nor has my speed or activity suffered in the least (which so many,
 erroneously, consider to be the inevitable result of such training).
 On the contrary, I feel as capable of doing my 10⅖ for the 100 as ever
 I did._

  _Believe me_,
  _Yours very truly_,
  HAROLD L. BUTLER.


  CASTELUAN,
  WIMBLEDON HILL, S.W.,
  _March 8th, 1899_.

  DEAR SIR,

 _Having been under your system for a little over a year, I should like
 to add a few words in praise of your system generally. I hardly think
 that actual figures as to measurements and weight-lifting, give any
 adequate idea of the general benefits received by anyone who takes up
 Physical Culture thoroughly and puts his back into it._

 _If figures are any guide to you, however, I may quote the following,
 which were all taken at your School in Ebury Street._

 _My lung capacity has increased from 283 to 417 cubic inches, my chest
 expansion from 39½ to 42¼, thigh from 20½ to 22⅝, and calf from 13⅞ to
 15¼._

 _In weight-lifting I can raise 125 lbs. from the ground with my right
 hand above head by means of the body-press, instead of 60 lbs. With
 two hands I can jerk 165 lbs. instead of 85 lbs., and I can hold out
 at arm’s length with my right hand 45 lbs. instead of 20 lbs._

 _Your system has so generally benefited my whole physique, however,
 that I consider my health has improved to an extent far beyond any
 actual increase in figures._

 _One of the grandest benefits of Physical Culture is, to my mind, the
 increase of will power and general concentration, which can never be
 measured in any actual way, but which is bound to appear in after
 life, in short becomes an integral part of his character._

  _Yours truly_,
  CLAUDE BARTON.


  26, GORDON MANSIONS, W.C.,
  _March 21st, 1899_.

  DEAR MR. SANDOW,

 _I am glad to be able to say a few words about your system of Physical
 Culture. I write feelingly, for I can scarcely express how grateful I
 am for what it has done for me. A few years back I became unpleasantly
 conscious that a careless disregard for my health was beginning to
 unfavourably affect my work before the British public. Notwithstanding
 the indulgence shown me by audiences in all the musical centres, I
 could not disguise from myself the unpalatable fact that, as a result
 of neglecting a cold and getting generally “run down,” my singing
 voice was becoming seriously impaired. And so it remained until chance
 led me to your school of Physical Culture, and to renew the active
 bodily exercise which I had dropped for so long. The result was
 eminently satisfactory; I was soon once more able to fulfil my public
 engagements with reasonable satisfaction to myself and, I trust, some
 pleasure to my audiences. I entirely attribute the return of my powers
 to the course I went through on your system._

 _Actors and singers do not need great muscular strength, but they
 do most emphatically require health, and, of course, health and
 reasonable development go together. No man is such a slave to his
 physical condition as the actor or lyric artist. However great his
 talent, he cannot give expression to it if the machine be out of
 repair; his physical health is obviously his most valuable asset. For
 this reason alone I am sure that every member of my profession would
 be well advised to get into the way of devoting a few minutes every
 day to your exercises. The lyric artist especially would find his
 voice improve, his spirits be more exuberant, and his general vitality
 at a very much higher level. In addition he would in most cases
 discover in a very short time that his figure and limbs were so much
 improved that his former expenditure upon lambs-wool tights, padding,
 &c., would be entirely obviated._

 _I am_,
  _Yours very faithfully_,
  ALEC MARSH.


[Illustration: MARTINUS SIEVEKING.]




                               PART II.

                 INCIDENTS OF MY PROFESSIONAL CAREER.

[Illustration: Sandow at the age of ten.]




                               INCIDENTS
                                 OF MY
                         PROFESSIONAL CAREER.




CHAPTER I.

MY CHILDHOOD AND BOYHOOD.


It is not necessary, as some may think, to be born strong in order
to become strong. Unlike the poet, who, we are told, has to be born
a poet, the strong man can make himself. As a child, I was myself
exceedingly delicate. More than once, indeed, my life was despaired
of. Until I was in my tenth year I scarcely knew what strength was.
Then it happened that I saw it in bronze and stone. My father took me
with him to Italy, and in the art galleries of Rome and Florence I was
struck with admiration for the finely developed forms of the sculptured
figures of the athletes of old. I remember asking my father if people
were as well developed in these modern times. He pointed out that they
were not, and explained that these were the figures of men who lived
when might was right, when men’s own arms were their weapons, and often
their lives depended upon their physical strength. Moreover, they knew
nothing of the modern luxuries of civilization, and, besides their
training and exercise, their muscles, in the ordinary course of daily
life, were always being brought prominently into play.

The memory of these muscular figures were ever present, and when we
returned home to Konigsberg I wanted to become strong like them. But
though I used to try my strength and attend the gymnasium, nothing came
of my desire for some years.

So until I was eighteen I remained delicate. At that age I began to
study anatomy. It was thus I ascertained the best means of developing
the body, and invented the system of giving each individual muscle
a movement, and of so arranging the form of the exercises that when
some muscles are brought into play others are relaxed and left without
strain.

About fifteen minutes every day was the average time devoted to special
exercise at this period. It may be useful to remark here that no
particular form of diet was adopted. I ate and drank in the ordinary
way. It may be said at once that I have no belief in special diet; I
have always eaten and drunk that which my fancy dictated, but I have
always taken care to avoid anything in the nature of excess. There is
no better guide to good living than moderation. That is a fact I am
always anxious to impress upon my pupils. Let them be moderate in all
things, and they need fear no interruption in gaining strength by my
system of training.


[Illustration: The author]




CHAPTER II.

HOW I CAME TO LONDON AND DEFEATED SAMSON.


The years of my life between eighteen and twenty-one may be passed
over with the remark that they saw a steady gain of strength and some
occasional performances as an amateur athlete and wrestler.

In 1889 I made the acquaintance of Aubrey Hunt, the artist, who was
then at Venice. One of the most charming views in the neighbourhood was
to be gained from the grounds of my villa near Ledo. Naturally Mr. Hunt
wished to paint it, and it was a pleasure to be able to afford him the
facility. One result of our acquaintance was that Mr. Hunt painted me
in the character of a gladiator in the Coliseum at Rome. This picture,
which I prize very highly, is to be seen in the reception room at my
St. James’ Street school. I am told that it is a very striking likeness.

It was from Mr. Hunt that I learned that Samson was offering, at the
Royal Aquarium in London, £100 to the person who could perform the
feats of his pupil, Cyclops, and £1,000 to anyone who could beat his
own. Mr. Hunt suggested that I should accept the challenge, and it was
my original intention to come to London with him. It was ultimately
decided, however, that I should start without delay, and the journey to
England was made on the same day that I first heard of the challenge.

Arriving in London at six o’clock in the evening, I went to Mr. Attila,
a friend whom I had previously met at Brussels, to ask him to act as
interpreter, for at that time I was unable to speak English. Mr. Attila
not only promised his services, but gave me fresh hope by expressing
his assurance that everything that Samson and his pupil could do I
could accomplish easily.

We determined that the challenge should be accepted that night. With
Mr. Albert Fleming to act as agent, we went at once to the Aquarium.
When Samson appeared on the stage he gave the usual challenge.
Apparently to his surprise, Mr. Fleming accepted it, asking him if he
had the £100 at hand. Samson replied that there would be no difficulty
about the money, but Mr. Fleming insisted on seeing it, and the note
was accordingly produced. Samson was then asked if he had the £1,000
ready, and he promised that it would be forthcoming in the event of the
defeat of his pupil.

The preliminary arrangements having been completed, and the note for
£100 handed to Captain Molesworth, the manager of the Aquarium, I
walked up to the stage. Seeing me in evening dress, the audience were
unable to realise that I stood the slightest chance of defeating the
strong man and his pupil. They even shouted to Samson not to heed me,
but to get on with his performance. It seemed evident to them that I
was unequal to the task that had been undertaken, and Samson himself
burst out laughing when he saw me. The coolness and indifference of
this first reception in London were not, perhaps, unnatural, for
in evening dress there was nothing, as everyone said at the time,
specially remarkable about my appearance. But when I took off my
coat, and the people could see the muscular development, the tone of
indifference changed immediately to surprise and curiosity. Samson and
Cyclops themselves shared the general astonishment, though they did not
allow their surprise to be shown for more than a moment, Samson being
heard to remark, “We will beat him, anyhow.”

The first feat which Cyclops performed was to lift over his head two
weights of 56 lbs. each, lowering them with arms fully extended. This
performance I repeated. Cyclops next took the bar bell, weighing 240
lbs., and with two hands lifted it from the ground over his head.
When the audience saw that for the second time the same feat could
be accomplished with ease they began to cheer; and I repeated the
performance, after Cyclops, using only one hand.

All this time Samson, anxious of the issue, kept asking me in asides in
French to let him know my history. As, however, he did not, or would
not, speak in German, he had to remain in ignorance.

The performance proceeded, and now Cyclops took with one hand a
dumb-bell weighing 210lbs., and extending it at arm’s length, bent down
and raised over his head with the other a second dumb-bell, of 100lbs.
weight.

When I repeated this feat, it was thought that the challenge had
been won, for this was the end of the performance for which it was
understood it was offered. Mr. Fleming, accordingly, asked for the
£100, but Samson refused, saying that the whole performance would have
to be repeated and continued until one of the two competitors gave in.
Nothing less would satisfy him as to which of the two was the stronger.
On this point the audience disagreed, and called on him to hand over
the money. Appeal was made to Captain Molesworth, who addressing the
audience, promised to see fair play. He could not agree, he said, with
Mr. Samson that it was fair that the performance should be continued
until one of them dropped from sheer exhaustion, but he suggested that
Cyclops should introduce two fresh feats, and that if I could repeat
them the money should be mine without further question.

Although the audience still maintained that the challenge had been won,
I expressed, through my interpreter, perfect willingness to perform not
two only, but twenty more feats, should Cyclops wish to try them.

The first of the two extra feats was then taken: Cyclops lying on his
back, raised a weight of 240 lbs. with two men sitting on it, and when
the men jumped off he himself stood up, raising the weight with him.
This performance I also repeated.

Now came the final effort. At the side of the stage stood a great
stone, weighing, I should think, about 500 lbs. On this stone were
secured the two 56lb. weights. Two chairs were brought, and Cyclops,
standing on them, in order to get a position above the stone and its
weights, raised the whole load with his middle finger some four inches
above the ground.

When this performance had been repeated by me, Samson acknowledged
that that part of the challenge relating to Cyclops had been won, and
offered to hand over the £100.

My interpreter then explained that I had not come to London to win
merely the £100; I had come for the greater sum, the £1,000, in fact,
which had been offered to any person who should defeat Samson himself.

Samson, who was clearly surprised at the issue, replied that he was
not prepared to meet me that night, and though the public disapproved
of the postponement, it was eventually decided with Captain Molesworth
that the test should be made on the following Saturday evening.

The eventful evening which was to decide the issue between us fell on
the 2nd of November, 1889. Never, it was said, had the Royal Aquarium
been so densely crowded. The people began to arrive as early as two
o’clock in the afternoon. When I reached the building, in company with
Captain Molesworth, Mr. Attila, and Mr. Fleming, twenty minutes before
the hour announced for the challenge to be taken up, it was literally
impossible to get through the crowd.

Here, at the very outset, was a difficulty of a new and an unexpected
character. What was to be done? To try to get through the enormous
throng in twenty minutes was obviously hopeless. Willing as the crowd
might be to let us pass it was beyond their power to make way for us.
We determined, therefore, to go to the stage door, and here a further
difficulty presented itself. We could not gain admission; no one would
open the heavy door. The man behind had received the strictest orders
to prevent anyone from entering. In vain did Captain Molesworth implore
him to let us through, explaining who we were. The man was obdurate.
He said that he was very sorry, but he failed to recognise Captain
Molesworth’s voice, and he could not disobey explicit instructions.

All the time the precious minutes were flying, and the hour when
the challenge was to be met had actually arrived. It was, indeed, an
anxious and a trying moment. We heard afterwards that when the hour of
the challenge came and Samson saw that I was not there, he strutted up
and down the stage, exclaiming: “Ah! see, he does not come! I thought
he would not meet me. I will give him five minutes, nay, ten minutes
more.” He took out his watch, the minutes were speeding, and still
Samson stood alone.

Meanwhile, resolved not to be baffled by this absurd mischance, it was
determined that, as fair words would not open the door, strength should
smash it open. A blow well directed, and the door was burst from its
hinges. The man inside was slightly injured by this rough method, but a
ten pound note served to solace Ins feelings, and to heal his wounds.
And we--well, we just managed to save the challenge by the space of
half-a-minute.

The Marquís of Queensberry and Lord de Clifford were appointed judges,
and they examined closely all the bars, bells, weights, and chains
that were to be used in the performance. Samson first desired that I
should follow him in some juggling feat with a water bottle, but the
judges decided that this was not in the order of the performance. Only
such tests of actual strength as Samson was in the habit of displaying
could now be allowed. Samson, abiding by this decision, took a large
iron bar and bent it over his calf, his arms, and his neck, just as, in
a similar way, by striking it on the muscles of the arm, one may bend
a poker. The thing is little more than a trick. Of course, muscle is
essential to its successful performance; for if you have no muscle you
will hit the bone, with the danger of breaking it. Such a performance,
although there is a certain knack in doing it gracefully, and with
ease, was not difficult to follow.

Samson next took a wire cable, winding it round his chest, under his
arms, and then breaking it. This feat, which is performed by inflating
the lungs and at the same time contracting the muscles of the chest, I
was also able to repeat.

By the third item in the display it seemed that Samson desired to
leave the issue of the challenge in doubt, for it consisted in snapping
a chain which encircled his arm. This armlet, which fitted Samson
well enough, was too small for me. Fortunately I was prepared for the
emergency. I had ascertained where the chain was bought, and had got
the same firm to make me an armlet of exactly the same strength, of
a size suitable to my larger development. When I produced it, Samson
at first refused to be satisfied that it would be a fair test, but a
representative of the firm who made it stood up in the auditorium and
assured the public that it was of the same strength as that of the
chain made for Samson. The judges examined it, together with the paper
which testified to the equality of strength, and decided that the test
would be perfectly fair and that the performance was to continue. I
placed the chain on my arm and broke it.

Samson was still dissatisfied, and I made the offer that if either he
or his pupil, Cyclops, could repeat my performance with a dumb-bell
which I had at hand, we would declare the result a draw, and he could
keep his £1,000. The dumb-bell, which was then brought on to the stage,
weighed 280lbs. With one hand I lifted it up, then laid down, and
finally stood up with it. After that feat I fastened some chains round
my arms, then took a dumb-bell weighing 220lbs., raised it to my chest
and burst the chains before releasing it.

“I have had enough of this,” now exclaimed Samson. “It’s all humbug, I
don’t call this fair play at all.”

The judges, however, were sufficiently satisfied, and Mr. Fleming asked
for the £1,000. The reply was that it should be paid in the morning,
but it remains to be added that I never received that £1,000. It was
stated that Samson had taken his money away, and in the end I agreed to
accept £350 from the management of the Aquarium in settlement of the
challenge.

When we left the Aquarium after the contest the great crowd followed
us cheering, and the four-wheeled cab into which we got, was lifted up
by these enthusiasts. The crowd cheered us all the way to my rooms in
Leicester-square; newspaper men poured in to interview me; and though
I had then no intention of giving performances in public, I was induced
to accept one of numerous offers, of £150 a week, made by a syndicate
of the members of the Lyric Club, and I commenced an engagement at the
Alhambra, giving Mr. Attila £30 a week to assist me.

I spent three months at the Alhambra, and three months in the
provinces, and entered into engagements for some years to come.

The reader will probably ask if special means were adopted during this
and succeeding engagements to maintain my strength. The answer is very
simple: The performance itself provides the necessary amount of daily
training. I eat, drink, smoke, and sleep quite in the ordinary way,
taking care to observe in all things that guiding rule of moderation to
which reference is made in the preceding chapter. I only practice, in
order that grace and perfection may be attained, when some new feat is
introduced. Personally it may be added, I find that the best time for a
performance is about three hours after a meal.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER III.

I MEET GOLIATH.


At the end of my first engagement in London and the provinces, I
went to Germany for a holiday. Driving out one day at Aachen, I met
a veritable giant. He was a quarryman, and he was engaged in loading
stones. So huge and extraordinary was his appearance that my horse
positively shied at him.

Imagine, if you can, this tremendous fellow: his head as huge and
grotesque as that of any pantomime mask, with a nose the size of an
ordinary fist. As for his own fist, it would have made more than three
of mine, and when a five-shilling piece was placed beneath the ball of
his finger, believe me, it was impossible to see it. So large were his
boots that not only could I get both my feet into one, but I could turn
entirely round inside. And yet, strangely enough, despite his immense
limbs and body, he was not an extraordinarily tall man. A little more
than six feet; six feet two-and-a-half inches, in fact, was his height.
His chest measurement was about eighty inches and his weight 400lbs. He
was not a fat man in proportion to his size. Quite the contrary. He was
bony and muscular.

The thought occurred to me as soon as I saw him that to give him a
part in a performance as a modern Goliath would be, from a popular
point of view, eminently attractive. I asked him what wages he was
earning. “Five marks a day,” he replied. It appeared that he was given
nearly double the pay of an ordinary labourer because he could lift
heavier weights and load the carts more quickly. I told him that if he
liked to accept an engagement with me I would give him twenty marks
a day, whether he worked or not. A German mark, as everyone knows,
is equivalent to an English shilling. The giant quarry man could
scarcely credit such good fortune, and eventually it was agreed that
he should come to my house to talk the proposal over, and have his
strength tested. When he came it was found that he could do nothing
more than lift heavy weights from the floor. He had never put himself
into training, and his exceptional proportions, which, under different
circumstances, might have been turned to good account, were of no
special use to him. However, it was settled that he should come with
me, and I brought him to England.

Well do I remember our arrival at Charing Cross. The huge size of
Goliath, whose real name, by the way, was Karl Westphal, attracted
the most pronounced attention. It was impossible to think of taking
a cab, for no cab would have held him, even if he had been able to
get inside it. There was, therefore, nothing for it but to walk to
my chambers, which were then in Rupert-street, Piccadilly. Thousands
of people followed us the whole way, and Rupert-street was blocked.
A giant, when you have got him, is rather like a white elephant. He
is a rare creature, but it is difficult to know what to do with him.
It would have been clearly unwise to let him go into the streets, and
accordingly he had to be kept indoors. For seven or eight weeks I tried
to train him, but he proved an idle fellow, and it became evident that
nothing much could be done with him.

I had an engagement at that time at the Royal Music Hall, and a
performance was arranged in which Goliath had to surprise me, lumbering
after me across the stage, and trying to hold me in his grip.

We wrestled together, and it was his business to make himself the
victor. Then, in order to finish me, he took a cannon, weighing
400lbs., and placing it on his broad shoulders, prepared to fire. In
a moment or so I returned with the clubs. It was now the turn of the
giant to show alarm, and gradually he had to retire, with the cannon
still on his back, into a frame of refuge. I at once climbed to the
top, and getting into a position above my antagonist, I lifted him,
his refuge, and his cannon, with one finger, a few inches off the
ground. During this part of the performance we fired the cannon, and
the whole display was brought to a conclusion by placing my arm through
a leathern belt which girt his waist, and carrying him at arm’s length
off the stage.

What became of him after he left me I never heard. The last report was
that he had carried off his own landlady, and that the two had started
some sort of show together.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.

A PRESENTATION UNDER CURIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES.


After my engagement at the Royal came a holiday in Paris. It was there
I met a very dear school friend, whom I had not seen since I was about
ten years of age. My friend’s father was at this time German Consul at
Paris. The incident which followed our meeting will be better explained
by prefacing the story with the statement that as boys we were great
billiard players. We were continually playing at each other’s houses,
and, though we were such mere lads, we could even beat our fathers at
the game. Nothing, therefore, was more natural than that, when we met,
my friend should ask me if I was still a good player. As a matter of
fact I was not in practice, but that did not deter us from deciding to
try our skill. So we went to a room which he selected, and started a
game. He did not know then that I had made my strength a profession; he
was rather under the impression that I had followed my father’s desire
and studied medicine. However, the game began, and, as we talked a
good deal over old times and spoke in German and played rather slowly,
I suppose we unconsciously annoyed a party of Frenchmen. At any rate
they made unfriendly remarks, and before we had finished our game
they marked on the slate that they had engaged the table. Wishing to
play again, we were not disposed to give it up to people whose manner
was obviously offensive. As our right to continue was disputed, the
attendant was called, and it was pointed out that, according to the
regulations of the establishment, we were perfectly within our rights
in playing a second game. So we played on, and whilst we were joking
and laughing about old times they, it seems, thought we were making fun
of their discomfiture.

When the game was finished we ordered two steaks, which were served
at a table behind the players. We were still laughing over old times
when one of the party came up, saying angrily, “I’ve had enough of your
laughter; if you don’t stop be sure I’ll make you.”

I told him that I was very sorry that my mood offended him, and if I
could not laugh at our own personal jokes I should be sorrier still.
It was added that I did not wish to interfere with him, and it was
suggested also that he should attend to his own game and leave us alone.

It was evident that he wished to pick a quarrel. Nor would hot words
suffice him. Vowing that he must give me something to remember him
by, he struck me across the face. Beneath this fresh insult I tried
to remain quite calm, telling my assailant that it would be certainly
better for him to take himself off and leave me alone. But at such
times, when the temper is quick, good advice is not heeded; moreover,
he probably thought he had to deal with some one of poor spirit.

Whatever may have been in his mind the facts are plain: finding that
I took one blow calmly he struck me another and called me coward. My
friend, who had hitherto kept quiet, now attempted to interfere, but I
held him down, nearly wrenching his wrist round. The force which was
exerted must have given him an idea of the strength that was ready to
be used if it were needed, for looking first at his wrist and then at
me, he exclaimed in English, “Why don’t you knock the fellow down?”

“So you speak English,” said the Frenchmen, “Why don’t you get up
and fight me?” With these words he struck me fiercely on the nose.
The blood streamed down my clothes, which were spoilt besides by the
gravy that was splashed on them in the disturbance from the dishes. My
appearance must have been deplorable, and as I was that morning wearing
a new suit, I lost my patience with the man. I walked slowly towards
him, and with a quick grip of his neck and knees, I picked him up,
knocked his head and knees together, and banged him down in the centre
of the table. The table broke through, and he fell to the ground. You
can imagine, I daresay, the scene of wreckage and consternation--the
smashed table, the man dazed, lying in a heap on the floor, his friends
around him open-mouthed with amazement. In the midst of this scene I
sat down with my friend and smoked a cigar.

A gendarme was fetched. He entered the room and wanted to arrest me.
The proprietor caught hold of him, saying, “Be careful, he is an
awful man, he will kill you. You must have some assistance.” Four
more gendarmes were summoned, and, refusing to take me in a cab, they
marched me along to the police station. Some of the friends of the
man who was hurt accompanied us and explained to the authorities that
the regrettable affair was not my fault. They were sorry at what had
happened, and I was liberated on bail.

Meanwhile they took their injured comrade to the hospital. He was still
unconscious, and in that condition he remained a day and a half. Being
sincerely sorry for the injury I had caused, I called at the hospital
and asked to see him, but he refused.

As soon as he recovered, which was not for some weeks, I left Paris to
return to London to fulfil an engagement at the Tivoli.

One night, whilst I was performing there, the porter brought me a
message asking if I would step up to see a gentleman and a party of
friends in a private box. When I went up I seemed to recognise the
face of the person who wished to see me, but I could not recall where
I had seen it before. The party invited me to take wine with them, and
nothing would satisfy them but my consent to be their guest at supper.

When we reached the hotel, my host said: “I perceive, Mr. Sandow, you
have only pretended that you know me. You do not really recall my
identity.”

It had to be confessed that he was right.

“If you really knew me,” he proceeded, “you would probably not speak to
me.”

“Why not?” I asked. “I speak to you because I seem to like you, surely
that is sufficient.”

“We will see,” he added; “I have come a long way to see you. I have
come from Paris. I am an amateur in your own line, performing feats of
strength myself. Of all my friends I have the reputation of being the
strongest. Having read of your performances in the French and English
papers, I was determined to come to London to see you. I saw the whole
programme at the Tivoli to-night, waiting impatiently for your display.
When you stepped on to the stage I nearly dropped to the ground.”

“Why!” I asked, growing curious.

Tears stood in his eyes, as he exclaimed earnestly, “Will you promise
to forgive me, promise me that or I cannot tell you.”

I told him that I did not know what I had to forgive, but at any rate I
promised to forgive him in advance.

“Well,” he went on, “if I had known you were Mr. Sandow I would never
have struck you that blow in Paris;” and then in enthusiastic French
fashion he clung hold of me and kissed me on the cheek--on the cheek
that he had previously smacked--before all the people.

Of course, why had I been so blind? This was my assailant of the French
billiard room. All, however, was now forgiven and forgotten, and as a
token of our good understanding he presented me with a handsome gold
watch. To-day we are the greatest friends, and, whenever I go to Paris,
I stay with him. He is a French Count, but for obvious reasons, not the
least being that he is my friend, despite the hard knocks which came of
our first meeting, it would not be fair to disclose his name.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER V.

THE LIVING WEIGHTS.


About this time there were many strong men. Each hall in London could
boast of at least one. It was also a great weight lifting period.
When I lifted my heaviest bell, 280lbs., the other strong men put out
a placard stating that they were lifting 300lbs. By the time I had
practised sufficiently to raise the weights I was lifting from 280lbs.
to 300lbs., they came out with the statement that they were lifting
320lbs., and so their little game went on.

For my part I was determined to introduce a novelty. Henceforth, there
should be actually living weights. I started, therefore, at the Tivoli
with a new display, lifting a horse at arm’s length above my head, and
marching with it to musical accompaniment.

This was followed by a display with human dumb-bells. Taking a long
bar with a large ball at each end, I placed in each ball a man, and
I raised bar, balls, and men, slowly over the head. After putting
them down the balls opened and the men rolled out. This performance I
accomplished in order to equal the feat of lifting 300lbs. dead weight.

Further, I lifted, and supported on my chest, a grand pianoforte, with
an orchestra of eight performers on top of the instrument.

There was still a fourth feat which I performed, knowing that no one
could equal it, and that was to turn a somersault whilst holding a
weight of 56lbs. in each hand.

These performances I repeated in the provinces. During this tour I had
the pleasure of visiting not only many of the chief cities of England,
but also Edinburgh and Glasgow. Who can fail to be deeply impressed
by the grandeur and magnificence of the scenery of Scotland? Certainly
I was not proof against it. Never have I visited a more beautiful city
than Edinburgh, and the Scottish people themselves I found exceedingly
kind and agreeable. Since then, I have been to Ireland, and can testify
that its people are as frank, generous, and warm-hearted, as they are
always represented to be. Certainly, some of the happiest days of my
life were those spent in the Emerald Isle.

At the end of my first provincial tour I returned to London to fulfil
an engagement at the Palace Theatre. Here I introduced another novelty.
In place of the orchestra I held three horses on my chest. These
animals stood on a plank, one at each side and the third in the centre,
holding the balance in a game of see-saw. Included in this performance
was the feat in which a Horse Guardsman on his horse rode over me, thus
completing at that time the chapter of living weights.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

ON THE “ELBE”: BOUND FOR NEW YORK.


We come now to the year of the Chicago Exhibition, when I entered into a
contract for an engagement in America, with Messrs Abbey, Scheffel, and
Grau.

An old friend and famous pianist, Martinus Sieveking, whom I knew
years before in Belgium and Holland, accompanied me to the New World.
Sieveking was a brilliant artist, but as a man he was exceedingly weak
and delicate. He had no powers of endurance, and it was difficult for
him to remain at the piano long at a time.

“If I had only your strength,” he used to say, “I think I might become
almost the greatest player in the world.”

I suggested that he should come with me as my guest to America,
guaranteeing that in nine months or a year, under my personal
supervision and training, he would grow so strong that his best friends
would scarcely recognise him.

Agreeing to come, he travelled with me all through America. The result
of my system and supervision was that his strength grew marvellously.
Within the year, weak as he was at the start, he became the strongest
of all my pupils, and the most redoubtable amateur I have ever met. The
portrait, which is printed on an earlier page will speak for itself
when you remember that a year before it was taken the sitter had a
gaunt, slim, delicate figure, with narrow chest, sloping shoulders, and
no muscles worth speaking about.

But I am going ahead too fast. Let us revert for a moment to our
departure from England. We sailed on the Elbe, the vessel that was
afterwards wrecked. There was a good deal of bustle in getting on
board, and some curiosity, I suppose, amongst the passengers, when
they saw the sailors straining beneath the weight of my luggage and
apparatus, and got to know that a strong man was to sail with them.
With the captain and the first engineer I became very friendly, giving
them, during the voyage, lessons in my system.

Somehow I used to feel that the ship we were on was a doomed vessel.
I am not ordinarily superstitious, and it is not necessary to attempt
to account for the feeling, but do what I would I could not shake off
the dread impression that one day that ship would go down. I became so
friendly with the engineer, whom I used to visit in his own cabin, that
I advised him to give up his appointment and go to sea no more.

Some time after that, whilst I was in America, the world was startled
by the news of the Elbe’s disaster. My friend, the engineer, was
amongst the few who were saved. He wrote me a letter telling me of
the tidings. This letter touched me very deeply, and, seeing that it
contains a story of singular bravery, it may not be inappropriate if I
introduce here so much of it as I remember.

Having commented on the strange fulfilment of my prediction, he
described how, when the boat was going down, the captain lashed
himself to the bridge, saying he would never leave his ship. From the
engineer’s boat they called to him to come on, but he would not stir.
Then they sent back the pilot, but still to no purpose. By the faint
glimmer of a lantern he pencilled a note which he asked might be sent,
if the bearer should be saved, with his heart’s love to his dear wife
and children. For the last time the pilot left the ship, and as the
boat bore away from its now fast sinking sides the captain from the
bridge, immovable from the post of duty, waved his long farewell.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII.

MY FIRST HOUR IN AMERICA.


First experiences are occasionally curious. You shall hear one of mine.

Although the day we reached New York was the hottest that had ever been
known in that great country of wonderful records, no heat, however
extreme, could detract from the glories of New York Harbour, certainly
the finest harbour I have ever seen. Numerous people, including, of
course, the ubiquitous newspaper men, came on board to welcome me,
bands were playing, and there was a gay and busy time generally.

Having landed, I entered a cab. Everyone, I suppose, has a vivid
recollection of his first cab in America. The independence of the
American cab-driver is sublime. It is something too great for words.
You can only draw a long breath--and admire it. The particular
journey which I was undertaking would have been in England something
considerably less than a shilling fare. Hoping to be generous I
proffered the driver an equivalent in English money to two shillings.
To my surprise he said, “I guess, Colonel, that’s for myself; your fare
is four dollars”--just eight times as much as I had offered. Of course,
I could not argue with the man. He knew better than I, and there was
nothing for it but to pay promptly what he demanded. Moreover, in
America, it must be remembered, they charge, not for the drive, but for
the cab.

Mr. Abbey, who met me on the boat, accompanied me to the hotel at
which I was to stay. At the office his attention was called away for
a moment, and I was left to the tender mercies of the bell boy, a
nigger, who was asked to show me the rooms.

“Come along, sir,” the boy drawled. And along I went, making my first
acquaintance with an American elevator, in which we were shot up
heavenwards.

“How high are we?” I asked, as we got out.

“Oh, this is the sixteenth floor,” replied the boy, in an off-hand
manner, “you can see if you look down.” I did look down. By Jove, the
depth down that staircase was tremendous.

Having selected my apartments, the boy coolly stood beside me in my own
room rolling a cigarette and lighting it in my presence. This action
seemed a little impudent, but it was nothing to that which was to come.
Remarking that I desired to wash, I also asked the boy if he would
clean my boots.

“Clean your boots?” he exclaimed, in blank astonishment, “we don’t do
that in America, we (speaking of course for himself and the niggers
like him) don’t clean boots here.”

“Who then,” I asked, “does clean them?”

“Oh, you must go down stairs for that.” And with these words he
reclined on my sofa, rolled another cigarette, and calmly smiled at me.

This was really too much for white flesh and blood to bear. I said to
him sharply, “Look here, young man; I may be a stranger in this country
and ignorant of some of its ways, but I know enough of Americans to be
quite sure that it is not right for you to conduct yourself in this
way. If you don’t promptly clear off I will report you!”

But the boy was not easily to be moved. Instead of taking himself off
he squared up and wanted to fight me. So I just took hold of that boy,
and testing his jacket and trousers to be sure that they would bear the
strain, I swung him over the sixteenth floor staircase. And there for a
few moments I held him, just to give him a view of the depth, which was
so tremendous.

My word, didn’t that boy shout and scream! I assured him that he
was quite safe in my hand so long as it was closed, but if he ever
attempted his impertinences again I would bring him to the same spot
and open it. And I reminded him that a drop through sixteen floors
would not be good even for nigger boys who smoked cigarettes in private
rooms and affected to be indignant at the suggestion that they should
clean a visitor’s boots.

The boy’s cries drew a small crowd, including Martinus Sieveking and
the manager of the hotel. The manager fully agreed with the warning
I gave the boy, and was profuse in his apologies, saying that such
conduct from a bell boy was unprecedented.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII.

INCIDENTS OF THE AMERICAN TOUR


A fortnight after my arrival in New York I commenced an engagement at
the Casino, and after each performance, whilst I was still stripped to
the waist, I gave lecture on anatomy and my system of physical culture
in my dressing-room. These lectures were attended by many of the most
notable people in America, the crowded audiences including several
ladies. I demonstrated how each feat was accomplished, and let the
people feel for themselves my muscles, to prove that whilst, when they
were relaxed they were as soft as butter, when contracted they were as
hard as steel.

I repeated at the Casino the performances that I had been giving at the
Palace Theatre in London. As my engagement lengthened I grew better
acquainted with the American people, whom, let it frankly be admitted,
I liked immensely. They are wonderfully nice fellows, these Americans.
The only fault that is to be found with them is the too generous
length to which their hospitality is liable to go in the direction of
cock-tails. They like to give you a bath of cock-tails, and if a bath
should not suffice, they would think nothing of making a river for
you. For a moderate drinker like myself, their generosity is a little
embarrassing, but as the point was emphasised that I could never have
the assurance to say that I had been to America without tasting a
cock-tail, I at last yielded to their persuasions, and, judging from
the samples of Manhattan, Martini, and Oyster, which I tried, I am
hound to confess that these drinks are exceedingly nice and that there
is little to beat them. Another striking feature of life in America
is to be found in the trotting horses. They are simply marvellous
creatures, moving with the ease and almost with the speed of a railway
engine.

From New York I went to Boston, where my system of physical training
became very fashionable; and after the Boston visit came Chicago, Mr.
Sieveking always accompanying me.

When I arrived at Chicago I went to the Trocadero, where I was to
appear, and inquired for the manager. A tall slim fellow made his
appearance in answer to the inquiry, and for some minutes a game of
cross purposes ensued. For whilst I was not sure whether he really was
the manager, he doubted whether I was the strong man whom he expected.
At last, however, I ascertained that he was Mr. Ziegfeld, or at least
Mr. Ziegfeld’s son, and he was assured that I was Sandow. He showed me
round the theatre, which was a tremendous place, with accommodation for
fully six thousand people. It had been originally an armoury, and was
used more for concerts than variety entertainments. Mr. Ziegfeld had
taken it because his other theatre, two days before the opening of the
exhibition, was burned down. At the time of my arrival it was proving
too big, but, as good luck would have it, such was the popularity of my
performances, the building, despite its huge size, was filled nightly.

In the exhibition grounds one morning shortly after my arrival, Mr.
Ziegfeld suggested that I should drive round in one of the hand wagons.

“My dear fellow,” I said, “it would never do for a strong man to be
pushed round like that, what would the people say?”

“Oh, they don’t know you yet,” replied Mr. Ziegfeld, “you get in and
try it.”

It was no use for me to chaff him by saying that these wagons were
more suitable for idle fellows of his slim proportions, for inside he
would have me get. Who of all people in the world should come to push
me round but an unfortunate hunchback! The result was that next morning
the papers came out with illustrations of the ludicrous scene, with
the heading “The strong man too strong to walk.”

At the termination of the World’s Fair, Mr. Ziegfeld proposed that
I should prolong my tour. I accepted his suggestion, engaged him as
my manager, and he booked a tour for me, including all the principal
cities. Throughout this tour I offered at each performance ten thousand
dollars to any person who could duplicate my feats of strength or even
do anything that could be said reasonably to approach them.

At St. Louis, one of the greatest beer brewing districts in the world,
the challenge, I was informed, was to be accepted. The youth who was
prepared to meet me, explained that he was somewhat too stiff to
accomplish all my feats, and I accordingly promised that if he could
repeat one of them, that was to lift with one hand over his head my
heaviest dumb-bell weighing 300lbs., I would consent to give him the
money.

When the time came for him to take up the challenge, he grew alarmed
at the prospect. In answer to my manager’s announcement from the stage
that we were ready for him, and that the money had been duly deposited,
he stood up in the auditorium to remark that the challenge was made
only as an advertisement, he did not believe in it, and he refused to
come to the stage. With these words he rushed out of the building. His
friends, who had a good deal of faith in his physical powers, rushed
after him, and succeeded in bringing him back. In order further to
encourage his drooping spirits my manager offered him the ten thousand
dollars if he would lift the weight over his head with both hands.
But still he did not like to attempt the task he had before rashly
undertaken. We then reduced the conditions still further, promising
that if he would lift the weight with two hands even as high as his
shoulders we would still give him the money. His friends now chaffed
and now rallied him, and at last he put his strength to the test; but
lo, this vaunted strong man was a very weak man, for so far from being
able to raise the weight to his shoulders, he succeeded scarcely in
moving it from the ground.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX.

MY LION FIGHT IN SAN FRANCISCO.


Perhaps the greatest, certainly the most thrilling, of all my
experiences is that which I am about to relate. It is the story of my
lion fight in San Francisco.

I was performing in that western city at the time of the mid-winter
fair, which followed the Chicago Exhibition. In connection with
this fair Colonel Bone was exhibiting a great menagerie. One day he
advertised a fight to the death between a lion and a bear. A tremendous
tent, with accommodation for twenty thousand people, was erected for
the occasion. Thousands and thousands of persons had bought tickets,
when the police issued an order forbidding the performance, and the
proposed spectacle had to be abandoned.

The thought occurred to me that I should take the bear’s place, and
measure my strength against the king of the forests. Of course there
is always between the unarmed man and the beast this disadvantage,
that the beast has natural weapons in his teeth and claws, whilst a
man has nothing to help him in the fight. This lion, moreover, was a
particularly furious animal. Only a week before he made a meal of his
keeper. I have met many lions in various places, and this beast was
certainly the largest and finest of them all. I was fully prepared to
meet him as he was, provided I could have an equivalent for his claws
in a short dagger or some similar weapon; but the law in America, as
in England, is rightly very stern against cruelty to animals, and the
dagger, of course, could not be allowed. If I desired to meet the beast
the only way was to fight him as I would box a man, completely unarmed.
As there is no law to prevent cruelty to men, there was no objection
to this method, though Colonel Bone, as well as my own friends,
insisted that if there was to be a fight it must be a struggle between
brute strength and human strength. In short, mittens would have to be
placed on the lion’s feet to prevent him from tearing me to pieces with
his claws, and a muzzle would have to be placed over his head. Even
with these precautions I was advised not to proceed with the contest.
“With his strength,” said Colonel Bone, “he’ll knock your head off.”
But, personally, I had no fear, I was only anxious for the contest to
begin. The engagement was accordingly made, and “A lion fight with
Sandow” was boldly advertised. The announcement sent a thrill through
the cities for hundreds of miles around, and in order fully to be
equipped for a performance which would be bound to attract thousands
and thousands of people, I decided to rehearse my fight with the lion
beforehand.

Accordingly, preparations were made, and with much difficulty the lion
was mittened and muzzled. It took several men with lassos and chains
some hours to perform this operation, for not only had they to guard
against the animal’s overpowering strength, but they had to proceed
cautiously in order not to injure him. A great cage, measuring seventy
feet across, was brought round, and into it Colonel Bone, one of the
most experienced of lion tamers, let the animal enter. Few people were
present, but amongst them was my manager, that tall, slim, great,
little Ziegfeld, with a face white as snow. There is no doubt that Mr.
Ziegfeld and the small company felt the position acutely, for, though
personally I had confidence in myself--and confidence of victory is
always half a battle won--yet those around were by no means sure of the
issue, and there was some fear that my first fight with a lion might be
my last.

However, my purpose being fixed, I entered the cage, unarmed and
stripped to the waist. The lion, with fury in his eyes, crouched down
ready to spring. Having read a good deal of the methods of the lion I
was not unprepared for this form of attack. As he made his last strain
for a tremendous leap I stepped sharply to the side and he missed his
mark. Turning quickly before he had time fully to recover, I caught
him round the throat with my left arm, and round the middle with my
right. By this means, though his weight was 530lbs., I lifted him as
high as my shoulder, gave him a good hug to assure him that it was
necessary to respect me, and tossed him on to the floor.

Thus outdone at his first attempt, the lion roared with rage. Rushing
fiercely towards me he raised his huge paw to strike a heavy blow at my
head. For the moment, feeling the swish of the lion’s paw as it passed
my face, I really thought that Colonel Bone’s remark that he would
knock my head off would prove true. Luckily I dodged my head just in
time, and got a good grip round the lion’s body, with my chest touching
his and his feet over my shoulders. Now came the tussle; the more I
hugged him the more he scratched and tore, and, though his feet were
mittened, he tore through my tights and parts of my skin. But I had got
him as in a vice, and his efforts to get away were fruitless. Choosing
an opportune moment, I flung him off me, Colonel Bone and my manager
shouting to me to come out of the cage, as I had done enough, and the
lion’s rage was unbounded.

I was determined, however, before I left to try just one other feat.
Moving away from the lion, I stood with my back towards him, thus
inviting him to jump on me. I had not to wait many moments. He sprang
right on my back. Throwing up my arms I gripped his head, then caught
him firmly by the neck, and in one motion, shot him clean over my
own head to the ground before me. Colonel Bone rushed into the cage,
snapping two revolvers to keep the lion off, and I came out, my legs
torn, my neck bleeding, and with scratches all over my body; but I felt
that I had mastered that lion, and that I should have little difficulty
in mastering him again at the performance that was to be given next day
in public.

When the hour for the fight came, the huge tent which held twenty
thousand people was literally packed in every part. The cage with the
lion was outside, and whilst he was being mittened and muzzled he
became so furious that he broke two iron chains that bound him, and
got loose. The people shrieked, the very men who a moment before had
been boasting of their bravery, were the first to fly, and there was a
general stampede. But the moment the lion saw my eyes fixed fearlessly
and firmly on him he seemed paralysed. Colonel Bone came up and pulled
out his revolver, telling me not to take my eyes off him, as I had him
in my power. Whilst we both remained motionless, the cage was brought
near his head, and by a dexterous movement I had him over on his back,
and once more he was a prisoner. The keepers tried again to mitten him,
and after a great struggle they succeeded.

Then came the scene in the arena. The lion appeared first, and as I
entered the whole place shook with cheers and applause. Through the
whole of that vast assembly ran a thrill of great excitement, and
photographers were there ready to take instantaneous pictures of the
various positions of the fight with the lion. But no sooner did I enter
the cage than the animal cowered down. He knew that I was his master:
and he refused to fight. Feeling that the audience would be sadly
disappointed, I tried to goad him on, but nothing would move him. Most
beasts are cowards at heart, and this lion having met his match at the
rehearsal, refused to budge.

At last I caught hold of his tail and twisted it. This was the only
thing that moved him. As he made a bound towards me I dodged, swung
round and picked him up, and then tossed him down. The fight lasted
scarcely two minutes. The lion, recognising that my strength was too
much for him, would fight no more. Though I lifted him up and walked
round the arena with him on my shoulders he remained as firm as a rock
and as quiet as a lamb. The fierce fight at the rehearsal had subdued
his courage. He was clearly conquered. I was afraid that my audience
would be disappointed with the comparative tameness of the proceedings,
but, on the contrary, everyone seemed thoroughly satisfied, and “the
lion fight with Sandow” was long the talk of the day in San Francisco.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER X.

FURTHER INCIDENTS OF THE TOUR.


At the end of my engagement in San Francisco I organised my own
company for a holiday tour in California. What a lovely country is
that; a country of perpetual summer and blue sky, of bright flowers
and delicious breezes. Well do I remember our arrival in Los Angeles.
Thousands and thousands of people came to meet our coach, the children
smothering us with roses as though it were some battle of flowers.

But, of course, there were rough journeys in America as well as
pleasant ones. On the way to Omaha, for example, we had an experience
of the wilds. At the small villages at which the train stopped it
seemed to be the custom to adjourn for the fifteen or twenty minutes to
the gambling dens that adjoin the stations. Gambling has never had any
attraction for me personally, but “In Rome one does as Rome does;” and
so in America. Accordingly, we visited one of these gambling houses.
There is no question about the gambling. You play with dice. Everything
is conducted at lightning speed, and before you know where you are high
stakes have been lost or won--usually, it may be said, they are lost.
In our case we started, in the few minutes at our disposal, by winning
a good deal. Then we lost, and we left that place with our pockets
practically empty. I had lost three hundred dollars, another lost four
hundred, and a third eight hundred.

During the next part of the journey we heard that there was another
gambling house at the station at which we should stop on our way. It
was in connection, we understood, with that at which we had just lost
our money, and no doubt the manager would be informed by telegram of
the easy manner in which we had been duped, in order to be prepared
for our arrival. But we were determined to be even with those gambling
house keepers. We agreed at the start not to risk more than five
dollars, and if we won we would depart with our winnings before the
luck, as in the last case, set in against us. For once expectations
were realised. Precisely the same thing happened. At the beginning we
had all the luck; we not only recovered what we had previously lost,
but each of us had a few hundred dollars to the good. Then of a sudden
our luck began to turn. That was the signal. There was six or seven
minutes to spare before the train started, and the manager and his
friends said “You have lots of time, gentlemen, they will tell you when
the train’s ready.” Much to their astonishment, however, we insisted on
leaving, and as we walked out with our pockets fairly full the faces
of those men were a study. I think on this occasion we had turned the
tables successfully.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI.

MY DOG SULTAN. END OF THE TOUR.


At this stage of the tour I will introduce, with the reader’s
permission, my dog Sultan, the holder of seventeen first prizes. This
dog, a handsome boar-hound, standing about thirty-four inches high at
the shoulders and weighing some two hundred pounds, had been presented
to me as a puppy by Prince Bismarck. Though I have never specially
trained him, the dog has remarkable intelligence. My companion
throughout my tour in America, he used to jump into the luggage van
at every journey’s end to find my trunks, and those that were not
too heavy for him to lift, he would bring out of the van. A similar
performance would be repeated when we reached the hotel. Sultan would
himself carry a good deal of the luggage upstairs, taking it up piece
by piece, and disdaining the assistance of the niggers who would
sometimes offer to give him help. Not unnaturally, he became a great
favourite wherever we went, and, though it was against the regulations,
the hotel managers would allow us to have him in our rooms. He would
never go out without carrying a satchel containing his chain and
muzzle, a box of pills, two brushes, a tooth brush, a comb, and a few
pieces of flannel, which were used for rubbing him down and keeping his
coat in careful condition. He seemed to know perfectly each of these
contents, and if one was ever missing he would not be satisfied until
it was found or replaced.

Sultan can carry me very easily. Once in America I sprained my foot.
I happened to be staying at the time at about the only hotel in the
country which is not furnished with elevators. My rooms were on the
second floor, and that faithful and devoted creature would carry me up
and down stairs before and after each performance, for I was still able
to fulfil my engagements despite the sprain.

It is a peculiar thing about Sultan that, though he will not hurt you,
yet if you enter a room whilst he is in it alone he will never let you
leave until someone has attended to you. As a thief catcher, he is, for
this reason, unequalled. On one occasion, as you shall hear, during my
American tour, he saved my watch--that watch which was presented to me
by my friend the French count. Whilst I am at the theatre I usually
leave my coat and vest hanging on the wall of my dressing-room, Sultan
being left in charge. One night we missed for more than an hour one of
the stage assistants. When I returned to my dressing-room I was unable
for the moment to enter. Sultan, it appeared, was blocking the door.
Pushing it open I found the missing assistant at the other end of the
room in a state of some uneasiness. I asked him what he was doing,
and he explained that he had come to see if he could offer me any
assistance. Having entered the room, the dog would not let him move,
and altogether he made out such a piteous tale that I sent him off with
half-a-dollar. When, however, I came to look at my things I found that
my watch, instead of being where I left it, in my vest pocket, was
lying on the table, together with some money which had been taken from
my pockets. It was then clear that the man’s real object in entering
my room was not that of assistance, but of robbery. I called him back,
verified my suspicions, and had him immediately discharged. For that
night’s work we treated Sultan to a special steak for his supper.

This unfortunately was not the only adventure which I had with this
watch of which I was so proud. My friend’s gift seemed to be doomed.
Whilst we were at Omaha there was a ball given in the city, and Mrs.
Sandow and I were invited to be present. As we should be late in
returning I told my valet to give Sultan his walk and then to take the
dog home with him for the night. We reached home about half-past two
in the morning, and being tired we went straight to bed. It may be
explained that our bedroom stood behind the drawing-room, from which
it was entered. Beyond the bedroom was the bathroom, in which I hung my
clothes, leaving my watch and chain in my vest pocket.

I felt that night, as I felt on the “Elbe,” that something was going
to happen. Owing to this feeling I took the precaution to lock the
drawing-room door. No one could enter the bedroom without coming
through the drawing-room first. We felt, therefore, reasonably secure.
In addition to my watch and chain, there was Mrs. Sandow’s jewellery,
which she had worn at the ball, whilst, amongst other special things, I
had five twenty dollar pieces, which I had bought because of their rare
dates. These gold pieces I left in my clothes in the bathroom; Mrs.
Sandow’s jewellery remained in a drawer in the bedroom.

Through the night we slept without disturbance. In the morning the
servant who came to look after our clothes noticed that my watch chain
had been broken and that my watch was missing. The five twenty dollar
pieces were also gone, but Mrs. Sandow’s jewellery was untouched.

Questioned as to how she got into the room, the girl said that the door
was open. Someone had evidently broken into our rooms whilst we slept
and had worked so quietly that they had not disturbed us.

A detective was called, and it was ascertained that shortly after we
returned from the ball two well dressed men entered the hotel and
asked for rooms on the first floor. It was then between two and three
o’clock. Before five o’clock they left. The detective remarked that
about that hour two men answering the description that was given had
been seen to enter a train, and he thought he would be able to succeed
in tracing them. I told him that if he brought my watch back he should
be well rewarded.

When the rooms were examined it was found that the door had been
opened by means of an instrument which was pushed through the keyhole
to turn the key. The gas had been half turned on during the night,
and no doubt they saw my watch-chain shining in the uncertain light,
and decided to take those things that they could lay their hands on
most easily without fear of waking us. It might have been supposed
to be risky work to rob a strong man; but, on the other hand, it was
found afterwards that the burglar was a desperate fellow, who had just
completed nineteen years’ penal servitude for shooting a man who was
unfortunate enough to wake up whilst he was rifling his room.

During the day the two men were arrested. Four of the twenty-dollar
pieces were found on them, but the watch was still missing. The men
were taken before the police authorities, but on the ground that the
case was not fully proved they were dismissed. After this decision,
the detective came to me to ask what the watch was worth. Five hundred
pounds I told him, in actual money, but for me it had a priceless
value, and not for five thousand pounds would I willingly part with it.

“Seeing that it is worth so much,” he said, “I will try to get it for
you if you will promise to give me £800.”

At this moment I realised the situation; at any rate I felt justified
in believing that this so-called detective was in league with the
burglars, who had themselves owned in court that they knew where the
watch was, though they refused flatly to give the information. Feeling
disgusted with a man who could thus play so false and mean a game I
took him by his neck and trousers and sent him flying through the door.

From that day to this I have never seen anything of my watch. It is,
no doubt, lost to me for ever. If I had had my dog with me that night
it would never have been stolen, for no burglar would have got past
Sultan, however clever he might be at picking locks.

             *       *       *       *       *

Throughout my tour I offered medals to those of my pupils who were
able to show the highest developments under my system of physical
training. Thousands of applications were received, and the amount of my
correspondence was enormous. In the end I arranged a meeting, at which
the pupils stripped for my personal examination, and there the awards
were made.

I received also several challenges during my tour. These challenges
were frequently made after I had left a city, and as it came to
be clear that those who made them merely sought advertisement by
associating their names with mine, I deposited ten thousand dollars
with the “New York Herald” on the understanding that anyone who
seriously meant business should also make a deposit as a guarantee
of his good faith. If he duplicated my feats of strength the money
would be his. But though this sum was deposited for about nine months
I never received an answer. No one ever attempted to win that ten
thousand dollars and I have the original cheque, made out to James
Gordon-Bennett, to this day. I have had it framed and preserve it as a
memento.

At the end of my first tour in America I returned to England, engaged
fresh talent for my company, and invented and practised some new feats
of strength, including that which I have entitled the Roman horse
exercise, and that in which two people drive over me with a horse and
chariot. Afterwards I paid a short return visit to America, to fulfil
certain engagements, and then came back again to London.




CHAPTER XII.

MY PERFORMANCE AT THE PRESENT TIME.


It may be useful, as a record, to indicate briefly the nature of the
salient features of my recent performance at the London Pavilion, and
since in the provinces.

To begin with there is a tableau, arranged for the purpose of showing
muscular repose, with all the muscles relaxed; muscular tension, with
all the muscles as firm as steel; the abdominal muscles; the biceps,
muscles of the inside of the upper arm; the triceps, muscles of the
back of the upper arm; the deltoid, muscles of the shoulders; the
trapezius muscle, which raises the shoulders; the muscles of the back;
the action and uses of different muscles; and the chest expansion, from
48ins. normal to 62ins.

The tableau curtains are drawn, and the scene changes to the arena.
Resting with my neck on one trestle and my heels on another, I hold
a 56lb. weight in each hand at arms’ length and support four men
simultaneously on my body. For the performance of this feat it may be
mentioned that exceptionally strong neck and abdominal muscles are
necessary.

Taking a pack of ordinary playing cards I tear them first in half,
then in four parts, and finally into eighths. Next I tear two packs,
and finally three packs, each pack containing the ordinary number of
fifty-two cards. The feat of tearing in half one pack of cards was
originally shown to me by the late Emperor of Russia. My reputation as
an amateur had reached his Imperial Majesty, who paid me the honour of
commanding my presence. During that interview his Majesty, as a test of
his own manual strength, took a pack of cards and tore it, as I have
said, in halves. He had never tried more than the one pack, but as is
apparent I have succeeded with three, the torn cards being distributed
each evening amongst the audience.

Another feat is performed lying prone on the ground. From this position
I lift with one hand a Roman chariot, rising upright with it and
afterwards lying down again. This feat brings the whole of the muscles
into play.

I also introduce my Roman horse exercise. Sitting on a horse and so
bending my back as to throw my head over the animal’s tail I raise at
arms’ length heavy weights from the ground. Next I pick up two men,
one after the other, raising them over my head and seating them in the
saddle.

Another interesting feat consists of lifting a man from a prone
position on the ground to the horse’s back, using one hand only.

As a concluding feat, I support on my chest a bridge weighing 800 lbs.
Over this bridge two persons drive a horse and chariot, making a total
weight of about 3,200 lbs.

Sometimes, however, I conclude my performance by lifting with one hand
at arm’s length a platform upon which rests an ordinary piano, with a
man seated playing upon it. Having lifted it, I march off the stage
with the lot, the musician playing a lively tune as we go.

I have not attempted to enumerate all my feats here; of course my
performance has been varied from time to time. But a number of other
feats have been referred to in the body of the book.

It may be interesting, perhaps, to add that I have recently composed
a musical march, entitled “Marche des Athlètes,” as well as a waltz,
“Sandowia” and other pieces, which musicians have been kind enough to
commend for their brightness and originality.




CHAPTER XIII.

MY MEASUREMENTS.


As a supplement to the previous chapter it may be stated here, in
answer to many inquiries, that my own measurements, etc., at the
present time are as set forth below. The first edition of the book
was written rather hurriedly, and consequently one or two trifling
inaccuracies crept in. These are now corrected:—

  Age                32 years.
  Weight             14 stone 6lbs.
  Height             5 feet 9¼ inches.
  Neck               18    inches.
  Chest              48       ”
  Chest expanded     62       ”
  Waist              30       ”
  Hips               42       ”
  Thigh              26       ”
  Knee               14       ”
  Calf               18       ”
  Ankle               8½      ”
  Upper arm          19½      ”
  Forearm            16½      ”
  Wrist               7½      ”

My strength, it may be added, is steadily increasing. If some one had
told me two years ago that I should be able to perform the feats of
strength that I now accomplish I would not have believed it. I feel
sure, moreover, that in the natural course of things, my strength will
continue to increase. With careful training the bodily strength ought
to increase steadily until the forty-fifth year is reached.

The above appeared in the first edition. Pupils will be glad to hear
that my belief has been fully justified, and that even since the book
was first published, some eighteen months ago, there has been a very
material increase in my strength.




                              THE THEORY
                                  OF
                          PHYSICAL EDUCATION
                                  IN
                          ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS.

                                  BY
                          THOMAS CHESTERTON,

_Organizing Teacher of Physical Education to the London School Board_.

           LATE CHIEF INSTRUCTOR AT THE ALDERSHOT GYMNASIUM.

      _Author of Manual of Drill & Physical Exercises, &c., &c._

First-Class (Advanced) Certificates for Physiology and Hygiene from the
                 Science Department, South Kensington.

        _Founder of the British College of Physical Education._

                            ———————————————

                           WITH A PREFACE BY

                         COLONEL G. M. ONSLOW,

        _Late Inspector of Military Gymnasia in Great Britain_.

    Examiner in Physical Education to the School Board for London.

                            ———————————————

            _Revised Edition now Ready_ =THREE SHILLINGS=.


                            MANUAL OF DRILL
                                  AND
                          PHYSICAL EXERCISES,
                 WITH OR WITHOUT DUMB-BELLS OR MUSIC.

    For the use of Teachers and Instructors of Physical Exercises,
 Students in Training Colleges, &c., as taught in the London and other
   Board Schools, all Army Schools, Principal Public Schools, Civil
Gymnasia, Polytechnic Institutions, and Evening Classes throughout the
                               Country.

          COMPILED AND ARRANGED FROM THE BEST AUTHORITIES BY
                          THOMAS CHESTERTON.

                            ———————————————

                     ILLUSTRATED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS.

                            ———————————————

                           REVISED EDITION.
          _With an Introduction by CHARLES ROBERTS, F.R.C.S._

                            ———————————————

                           THREE SHILLINGS.

These works have been adopted, by the London School Board, for use in
their Schools; and also by the Director-General of Military Education,
for use in all Army Schools.


                     LONDON: GALE & POLDEN, LTD.,
                 2, AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.
                       [_All Rights Reserved_].




                               SANDOW’S
                                “GRIP”
                              DUMB-BELL.


                               PATENTED
                                  ALL
                            OVER THE WORLD.

                               Complete
                                 12/6
                                Outfit.


WHY BE WEAK

WHEN YOU CAN

BECOME HEALTHY & STRONG?


 THE PERFECT DUMB-BELL for home use, for increasing the Strength,
 Flexibility, and Agility of the Muscular System.


Price 12/6 Complete.


Each Set includes:—

  A PAIR of NICKEL-PLATED DUMB-BELLS;
  A SET of SPRINGS;
  And CHART of EXERCISES; with a

=Special Initiatory Course, made out by Mr. SANDOW=.

ALL PACKED IN NEAT CASE.

 _Can be obtained from all Athletic Outfitters or from the
 Proprietors_:—

Sandow, Ltd., Sandow Hall, Victoria Embankment, London, W.C.




MY “GRIP” DUMB-BELL.

[Illustration; Author in profile]

The ordinary Dumb-bell, though excellent in itself, has one great
defect, which I have been conscious of for years. In prescribing
exercises for my pupils I am compelled to trust entirely to them as
to the amount of will-power used whilst exercising. They may work
energetically or slovenly according to their condition, but how they
work is beyond my knowledge or control.

How to combat this has long engaged my attention, and after long
years of study and experiment I have at last discovered a Dumb-bell
which absolutely compels the pupil to throw the necessary amount of
will-power into his work.

This appliance is very simple, and cannot go out of order. It consists
of a Dumb-bell made in two halves, separated about 1½ inches from one
another, the intervening space being occupied by small steel springs,
which may be of any strength.

When exercising, the springs are compressed by gripping the Bells, and
bringing the two halves close together, in which position they are kept
until the exercise is over.

The pupil who possesses these Bells will find that instead of having
to be continually buying heavier Dumb-bells, one pair will suffice him
for all time. All that it will be necessary for him to do will be to
purchase, at a small expense, new springs from time to time. All pupils
are advised to use the “Grip” Dumb-bell upon the merits of which I need
not enlarge.

I have always taught that muscle is developed by will-power, not by
mechanical movement, and the simple principle of this latest invention
is, by calling forth a continual exercise of will-power to obtain
results impossible with any previous Dumb-bell.

  Yours faithfully,

  _Eugen Sandow_




SANDOW’S SCHOOLS OF PHYSICAL CULTURE.

_Central Offices_—=Sandow Hall, Savoy Corner, Victoria Embankment, W.C.=


LONDON ESTABLISHMENTS:

 =32, St. James’s Street, London, S.W.=--Chief West End School. At this
 School each pupil receives individual instruction. =Three Months’
 Course, £10 10s.=

 =115a, Ebury Street, London, S.W.=, close to Victoria Station,
 accessible from all parts. SANDOW’S popular School at popular prices.
 Classes for ladies and gentlemen, =Three Months’ Course, £3 10s.=

 =Brook House, Walbrook, London, E.C.=, adjoining Mansion House, Bank
 and Stock Exchange. This School has been specially built for City men.
 Fitted with marble plunge bath, &c. =Three Months’ Course, £10 10s.=

 =185, Tottenham Court Road, London, W.= SANDOW’S Residential School.
 Forty bedrooms, restaurant, smoke-room, and two large airy gymnasia,
 70 feet long, luxuriously fitted throughout. The prices at this
 school are within the reach of everyone. Bedroom from 10s. per week.
 =Non-Residential Terms, Three Months’ Course, £2 10s.=

 =Crystal Palace School, Sydenham.= Separate schools for ladies and
 gentlemen.


PROVINCIAL ESTABLISHMENT:

 =Oxford Street, Manchester.= Classes for ladies and gentlemen. =Three
 Months’ Course, £5 5s.=

_Inspection invited at all Schools. Visitors will be shown over, and
the system explained._

In addition to Mr. SANDOW’S System of Physical Culture, boxing and
fencing taught at all schools.

=Prospectuses of any School sent on application.=


Measurement Form for Postal Instruction.

  See Figure on page 39.      Date............................

  _Name_..............................................

  _Address_...........................................

  Heart........................

  Lungs........................

  Digestion....................

  Age..........................

  Occupation...................

  Nature of Illness, if any.............................

  How long ago?.........................................

  Physical Peculiarity, if any..........................

  Medical Examination...................................

  Result................................................

  ┌─—─—─—─┬—─—─——─—┬─—─—─—─—┬─—─—─—─┴—─—─—─—┬─—─—─—─—┬─—─—─—─—┬─────—┐
  │       │  Chest │  Chest │ Upper │ Upper │Forearm │Forearm │      │
  │ Neck. │contract│ expand │ right │ left  │ right. │ left.  │Waist.│
  │       │  ’d.   │  ed.   │  arm. │ arm.  │        │        │      │
  ├─—─—─—─┼—─—─——─—┼—─—─—─—─┼——─—─—─┼—─——─—─┼—─——─—─—┼─—─——─—─┼——───—┤
  │       │        │        │       │       │        │        │      │
  │       │        │        │       │       │        │        │      │
  └─—─—─—─┴—─—─——─—┴─—─—─—─—┴─—─—─—─┴—─—─—─—┴─—─—─—─—┴─—─—─—─—┴─────—┘


  ┌─—─—───—─┬—─—─—─—┬─—─—──—┬─—─—─—─┬—─—─—─—──┬─—─—──—─—┬─—─—─—─—─—┐
  │  Thigh  │ Thigh │ Calf  │ Calf  │ Height. │ Weight. │ Measur’d │
  │  Right. │ Left. │ Right.│ Left. │         │         │    by    │
  ├─—─—───—─┼─—─—─—─┼—──—─—─┼─—──—─—┼─—──—─—─—┼─—────—─—┼──—──—─—─—┤
  │         │       │       │       │         │         │          │
  │         │       │       │       │         │         │          │
  └─—─—───—─┴—─—─—─—┴─—─—──—┴─—─—─—─┴—─—─—─—──┴─—─—──—─—┴─—─—─—─—─—┘


Fill up this form correctly in black ink, and forward, together with
Postal Order for =2/6=, to =EUGEN SANDOW, Sandow Hall, Savoy Corner,
Victoria Embankment, W.C.=--Mark Envelope “_Instruction_.”

_Sandow’s Large Dumb-bell Chart given FREE with each First Course;
usual price 1-_




PHYSICAL CULTURE

  TAUGHT BY LETTER!!!

_Mr. Sandow’s scheme for teaching his system of Physical Culture by
Post, for the benefit of all, Ladies, Gentlemen and Children, who
cannot personally attend any of his various Schools._

On receipt of pupil’s measurements, etc., Mr. Sandow will personally
prescribe a course of Exercises for home use which will be specially
adapted for each individual case.

Every Course will bear Mr. Sandow’s signature.

Each Course consists of a month’s work, doing the Exercises every day,
and should be renewed from month to month.

FEES.

  For One Month’s Instruction        2/6
   ”  Six Months’      ”            12/6
   ”  One Year’s       ”      One Guinea

After completing the first month pupils should send up fresh
measurements with a brief letter describing results.

Over 5,000 Pupils now enrolled.

Communications should be addressed INSTRUCTION DEPT.




SANDOW’S OWN COMBINED DEVELOPER.

_Used in all the Sandow Schools of Physical Culture._

On Sale all over the World.


A Combination of

  Rubber Exerciser,
  Chest Expander,
  Light Dumb-bells, &
  Weight-Lifting Apparatus.

[Illustration: Sandow with developer]

       ———————————————

A Complete Athletic Outfit.

Being detachable, the parts may be used separately.

The DEVELOPER adapts itself to the Strength of the user, and may be
used by a whole family.

  LADIES,
  CHILDREN,
  MEN,
  ATHLETES.

       ———————————————

 Packed in strong box with Charts, Foot Attachment, Screw, Hooks, &c.

       ———————————————

  One Price only:
  =12/6=


The following parts may be obtained separately:

  Extra Chest Expander Strands                         =3/-= per pair
  Long Front Strands (for heavy weight lifting)        =4/-=   ”
  2-lb. Nickel Dumb-bells (Sandow Pattern)             =4/6=   ”
  Chest Expanders with Dumb-bells, wire attachments,
    chart in box                                       =7/6=   ”
  Interchangeable Screw Dumb-bell Heads,
    from 2-lbs. to 10-lbs.                             =4_d._= per lb.

  _All communications to be addressed to The MANAGER_—

  _L. GRAHAM LEWIS_,
  Basing House, 17 & 18, Basinghall Street, London, E.C.




BAGSHAWES, Ltd.,

PUBLISH A BEAUTIFUL

  _=Art Catalogue=_ OF GREAT INTEREST
  TO ALL CONCERNED _=In Cycling=_.

TWO PAGES ARE DEVOTED TO THE NEW SYSTEM OF GRADUAL PAYMENT.

A copy will be sent =FREE= to all readers of this book on application.

  BAGSHAWES, Ltd.,
  159, Queen Victoria Street, London, E.C.




GYMNASTIC APPARATUS

Of every Description for PRIVATE and PUBLIC USE.

CHEST MACHINES, EXERCISERS FOR PRIVATE PRACTICE

At every price to suit all classes. _Price Lists Post Free on
Application._

  HEATH & GEORGE,
  _18, Goswell Road, London_.




SANDOW’S MAGAZINE

OF

PHYSICAL CULTURE.

Price 6d. Monthly or 8/6 per annum, Post Free, from--

GALE & POLDEN, LTD.,

2, AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.




  CATALOGUE OF COPYRIGHT
  AND MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS
  ISSUED BY GALE
  & POLDEN, LTD., 2, AMEN
  CORNER, PATERNOSTER
  ROW, LONDON, E.C.


Breathing, The Art of.

 As applied to Physical Development, with Respiratory Exercises for
 Children and Adults. By Surgeon-Captain HOPER-DIXON A.M.S., 1s. 6d.


Physical Drill With Arms Made Easy, in accordance with the New
Infantry Drill.

 Illustrated with 36 Plates, as taught at Aldershot, 9d.; Bound in
 Cloth, 1s.

“An invaluable little Book, for, thanks to the admirably drawn plates,
of which there are thirty-six, it will be of great use to the thousands
of desk-workers who can get no such training as that of the soldier,
and for whose health it is at least as necessary.”—_United Service
Gazette._


Physical Training Without Arms.

 Illustrated with 26 Plates. 3rd Edition, 9d.; Bound in Cloth, 1s.

“Physical Training Without Arms, Made Easy, with its numerous and rich
plates, and costing but a shilling, ought to be in the hands not only
of military men, but all Schoolmasters.” “It is a most useful, handy,
and interesting volume.” “Its hints and directions are invaluable.”


Free Gymnastics, and Light Dumb-Bell Drill as practised at the
Gymnasia at Aldershot.

 By Sergt.-Major NOAKES, Gymnastic Staff. =2nd Edition.= Fully
 Illustrated with 49 Plates, 1s. 6d.


Gymnastics. Upwards of 100 Tricks and Exercises on the Horizontal Bar,
 and how to do them. By A. DIMMOCK, 1s.




NEW LIGHT LITERATURE


  =A Soldier and a Maid: A Romance of the late War in Burmah.=
  =From Reveille to Lights Out; or, Lionel Tregarthen, Lieutenant.=
  =Ronald the Fusilier, or Foes under One Flag.=
  =A Military Crime; or, “Broke.”=

=Sword Flashes=; all by F. M. PEACOCK. Price 1/-each, Post Free.

 “The author writes in an easy, natural style, and gives graphic
 descriptions of military life abroad, which brings vividly before
 the eyes the scenes he wishes to depict. The stories abound with
 adventure, the love incidents are full of pathos, and there is a rich
 vein of humour running through them.”

 Captain Peacock has long left behind Mr. Rudyard Kipling and his
 “Soldiers Three,” and with a little more practice should rival Hawley
 Smart in depicting military life.—_Madras Mail._

  =Strange Case of a Missing Man.= A Romance. By CONWAY
      CREGAN                                                     1/-

  =A Circumstantial Case=, told by Sinclair Barton, M.D., and
      John Cox. By CONWAY CREGAN                             1/-

 “The reader will more than once be tempted to suppose that he is on
 the right track; but he is always deceived, and in the end the guilt
 is laid on the shoulders of one whom few, if any, will suspect. The
 author’s triumph is an uncommon one. Nor must it be forgotten that
 he has done something more than make an attractive short story; he
 has pointed out in the most forcible way the danger of accepting
 circumstantial evidence when unsupported.”—_Yorkshire Post._

  =A Left-Handed Murder.= By ANNIE CARRUTHERS, Authoress
      of “The Pet of the Consulate”                                  1/-

 This is a shilling novel that should command a large sale. It is
 written by Miss Annie Carruthers, and may be said to be quite as good
 as any of her former productions. The _locale_ of the crime is in
 France, and the tale is written somewhat after the style of a French
 novel.

  =The Black Carnation.= By FERGUS HUME, Author of “The
      Mystery of a Hansom Cab,” &c., &c.                             1/-

 “The particular crime described in this startling initial chapter was
 the slaying of a popular and beautiful _prima donna_ by a jealous
 adorer. A bouquet in which dynamite is concealed is flung at La
 Mazzucata’s feet, to be picked up, and with fatal enthusiasm, pressed
 against the fair one’s bosom. It is unnecessary to say more than that
 the rest of the novelette is worthy of this dramatic opening, and that
 it has a certain cleverness of its own which deserves recognition,
 even by those who do not profess to admire the methods of the
 sensation-storyteller.”—_Court Circular._

  =A Midnight Mystery.= By FERGUS HUME                  1/-

 “The author’s clever handling of sensational subjects is again
 displayed in his new story. The reader’s interest is aroused on
 the first page by a scene at Victoria Station, and held without a
 break.”—_Bookseller._

  =The White-Eyed Woman.= By ERNEST BOWEN-ROWLANDS      1/-

 “Is one of the best short sensational stories we have read. The
 mystery with which it deals is almost an unsolvable puzzle, and the
 writing is far and above what we have been accustomed to in this sort
 of book. It is rumoured that a dramatised version will shortly be seen
 on the London boards, and we are glad of it, for a novel which lends
 itself better to adaptation to the stage we have never seen.”—_Man of
 the World._




THE “HOUSE” ON SPORT.


The Work consists of 41 Articles, written by members of the Stock
Exchange on the branch of Sport with which they have particularly
identified themselves. For full list of contents see next page.

The work makes a handsome large octavo volume of 470 pages, printed
on Art Paper and profusely illustrated by over 230 Half-Tone Process
Blocks reproduced from photographs and drawings, many having been
specially taken and designed for the work, the photographs of all the
Authors being included.

The frontispiece is a beautifully printed photogravure of “A Group,”
consisting of “Persimmon” in Egerton House Paddocks, with Watts up,
dressed in the Royal Colours, H.R.H. The Prince of Wales, and his
trainer, Richard Marsh.

The profit derived from the sale of the book will be in aid of “THE
REFEREE” CHILDREN’S DINNER FUND; already a cheque for (£1000) ONE
THOUSAND POUNDS has been forwarded to the Fund and acknowledged in the
columns of _The Referee_, on January 15th, 1899.

His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales has accepted a copy of the work
and graciously expressed his appreciation of same.

The book can be obtained from all Booksellers or from the Publishers.

PRICE 21/-NETT.


WHAT THE PRESS SAYS.

From the TIMES, January, 1899.

 Not the members of the House of Commons but those of the Stock
 Exchange are responsible for the collection of articles upon sports
 and pastimes and the collection of records published under the title
 THE “HOUSE” ON SPORT and edited by Mr. W. A. Morgan. Of its success
 the names of the contributors are almost a certain guarantee, for
 the greater number of them are, or have been in their day, among the
 most celebrated exponents of the sports and pastimes upon which they
 discourse. It is impossible to name all the writers, but a selection
 will serve the purpose of showing the authority and experience
 with which these gentlemen write. Mr. W. M. Chinnery treats of
 Athletic Sports and Athletes--his achievements on the running path
 in the ’sixties were great. Mr. B. J. Angle, a veteran enthusiast,
 contributes a very interesting article on “The Noble Art,” in which
 will be found not only the records of the prowess of fighters of old
 time but also the keen criticism of an expert upon the modern style
 of boxing as compared with the old time method. * * * Of Cricket,
 Messrs. Gregor MacGregor and C. Carlos Clarke write; and of Cycling
 Mr. G. Lacy Hillier, acknowledged to be the highest authority, gives
 the history, to which he adds useful suggestions. * * * The various
 epochs of Rugby Football fall into the hands of Messrs. W. Maclagan,
 G. L. Jeffery, and A. Spurling, and Mr. S. Mure Fergusson has a useful
 little essay on Golf. Still one well-known name follows another until
 the reader begins to think that the Stock Exchange is the very home
 of sport. * * * The articles likely to attract the greatest share of
 attention are those dealing with Metropolitan and University Rowing
 and on Sculling. Mr. Morgan had, no doubt, plenty of talent to choose
 from. But to have been able to collect in one volume the views of
 Messrs. S. Le Blanc Smith, F. I. Pitman, S. D. Muttlebury, Reginald
 P. P. Rowe, and Guy Nickalls is a real triumph. That which they do
 not know of oarsmanship is not worth knowing. * * * Many articles
 have been passed over of necessity, but enough has been written to
 show that this is a pleasant and useful book, the work of men who
 speak from experience; it is generously illustrated, mainly with good
 reproductions of photographs.


THE “HOUSE” ON SPORT.


CONTENTS.

        PAGE

  ARCHERY      By F. L. GOVETT                                         1

  ATHLETIC SPORTS & ATHLETES      By W. M. CHINNERY                    9

  BOAT SAILING ON THE UPPER THAMES      By W. F. JACKSON              17

  BOXING. The Noble Art      By B. J. ANGLE                           37

  CANOE CRUISING. A Month in a Canoe Yawl  By GEO. A. RUSHTON         66

  COACHING      By W. R. FAULCONER                                    57

  COURSING      By T. W. LANG                                         79

  CRICKET in 1898      By GREGOR MACGREGOR                            89

  CRICKET      By CHARLES CARLOS CLARKE                              100

  CYCLING      By GEO. LACY HILLIER                                  108

  FENCING      By GODFREY R. PEARSE                                  121

  FISHING, Salmon--Trout      By ERNEST M. BRISTOWE                  128

  FOOTBALL, Association      By J. L. NICKISSON                      142

  FOOTBALL, The Different Epochs of      By { W. MACLAGAN
            the Rugby Game                  { G. L. JEFFERY          150

  FOOTBALL, Rugby      By AUB. SPURLING                              164

  GOLF      By S. MURE FERGUSSON                                     171

  HOCKEY      By STANLEY CHRISTOPHERSON                              182

  HUNTING      By PHILIP G. BARTHROPP                                190

  HUNTING      By LORD ALWYNE COMPTON. M. P.                         195

  HUNTING      By A. J. SCHWABE                                      202

  LACROSSE      By H. E BYERS                                        206

  MOUNTAINEERING      By J. OAKLEY MAUND                             259

  POLO      By {  E. B. SHEPPARD
               { WALTER S. BUCKMASTER                                221

  PUNT RACING      By W. COLIN ROMAINE                               236

  RACING      By A. J. SCHWABE                                       287

  RACKETS      By { F. S. COKAYNE
                  { HENRY D. G. LEVESON GOWER                        243

  ROWING, Metropolitan and General      By S. LE BLANC-SMITH         293

  ROWING, Cambridge      By  { F. I. PITMAN
                             { S. D. MUTTLEBURY                      313

  ROWING, Oxford      By REGINALD P. P. ROWE                         325

  SCULLING      By GUY NICKALLS                                      341

  SHOOTING, Pheasant--Partridge   By { PERCY LAMING
                                   SIR THOMAS TROUBRIDGE, BART.      385

  SHOOTING, Wood-Pigeon      By H. F. LAWFORD                        401

  SKATING, Bandy      By G. E. B. KENNEDY                            349

  SKATING, Figure      By ROGER H. FULLER                            356

  STEEPLECHASING      By CECIL GRENFELL                              363

  SWIMMING      By R. G. F. COHEN                                    377

  TENNIS      By { A. E. R. KENNEDY
                 { W. H. COHEN                                       408

  TENNIS, Lawn      By H. F. LAWFORD                                 424

  WALKING      By FRED. A COHEN                                      432

  WILD FOWLING      By W. A. BEAUCLERK                               438

  YACHTING. Corinthian Yachting and Corinthian Yachtsmen
      By AUGUSTUS G. WILDY                                           442


                              Price 21/-

                         GALE & POLDEN, LTD.,

                 2, AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.




                                  THE

                   OFFICIAL CRESTS, BADGES & HONOURS

                                OF THE

                             BRITISH ARMY,

  ALL BEAUTIFULLY EXECUTED AND HANDSOMELY PRINTED IN GOLD AND COLOURS

               6d. per PACKET or 5s. per DOZEN PACKETS.

_The “Crests” are put up in Twelve Packets, containing about =48=
Crests in each, and the “Badges and Honours” in Eight Packets,
containing about 24 Badges and Honours in each._

The Contents of No. 7 Packet of Crests are--


  Army Service Corps.
  Cameronians (S.R.) (26th and 90th R.)
    Do.      do.      do.
  Cheshire Regt. (22nd Regt.)
  Connaught Rngrs, 1st B. (88th)
    Do.      do.      do.
    Do.      (88th & 94th Rgts.)
    Do.      do.      do.
  Durham L.I., 1st Bn. (68th Rgt.)
  Essex Rgt., Depôt (44th Regt.)
  Gloucestershire Rt. (28th & 61st)
  Gordon Hdrs. (75th &. 92nd Regt.)
  Grenadier Guards.
  Hampshire Regt. (37th & 67th)
  Inniskilling Fus., R. 1st B. (27th)
  Irish Fus., Royal (89th Regt.)
  Lanc. Rgt., E., 2nd B. (59th Rt.)
  Munster Fus., R. (101st & 104th)
  Norfolk Regt. (9th Regt.)
    Do.      do.
    Do.      Depôt (9th Regt.)
  Rifle Brigade.
    Do.      do.
  Royal Artillery, 78th Field Bty.
  Royal Engineers, Mountd. Dep.
  Royal Horse Guards.
  Royal Monmouthshire Militia
  School of Musketry, Hythe
  Scots Guards
  Scots, Royal (1st Rgt.)
  S. W. Borderers, 2nd B. (24th R.)
  Suffolk Regt. (12th Regt.)
  Warwickshire Rt., Rl.(6th Rgt.)
  West India Rgt. 2nd Battn.
  Wiltshire Rgt., 2nd Vol. Battn.
  Yorkshire L.I., 1st B. (51st Rt.)
  1st (King’s) Dragoon Guards.
  7th & 57th Regtl. Dist. (Depôt Rl. Fus. & Middlesex Regt.)
  Behar Lgt. Horse (Indian Army)
  3rd Lancers (Hyderabad Contingent) (Indian Army)
  3rd Goorkhas (Indian Army)
  3rd Gurkha Rifle Regt.
  21st Regt. Madras Pioneers.
  23rd Wallajhabad L. Inf.
  Military College, Guatemala
  Manitoba L.I., 91st Regiment of Canadian Infy.
  Egyptian Army.


The Contents of No. 3 Packet of Badges and Honours are--

  Border Rgt., 34th & 55th Rgt.
  Connaught R’grs., 2 B. 94th Rgt.
  Cornwall L.I., 1st Bn. 32nd Rgt.
  Devon Rgt., 11th Rgt.
  Derbyshire Rgt., 45th & 95th Rgt.
  Essex Rgt., 1st Bn., 44th Rgt.
  Gloster Rgt., 28th & 61st Rgt.
  Gordon Hdrs., 75th and 92nd Rgt.
  Lancaster Rgt., Rl., 4th Rgt.
  Liverpool Rgt., 8th Rgt.
  Naval Crown.
  Northampton Rgt., 48th Rgt.
  Oxford L.I., 1st Bn., 43rd Rgt.
  Royal Artillery.
  Royal Engineers.
  Royal Marine Light Infantry.
  Surrey Rgt., Rl. West, 2nd Rgt.
  Suffolk Rgt., 12th Rgt.
  Warwick Rgt., Rl., 6th Rgt.
  Wilts Rgt., 1st Bn., 62nd Rgt.
  Yorks Rgt., 2nd Bn., 19th Rgt.
  Yorks Rgt., E., 15th Rgt.
  5th Dragoon Guards.
  13th Hussars.


                     THE BRITISH ARMY CREST ALBUM,

     Containing Honours and Nicknames of the Army, with spaces for
                Regimental Crests Badges, Honours, &c.

                            FOUR SHILLINGS.

Obtainable from Booksellers or from the Publishers--

  GALE & POLDEN, LTD., PUBLISHERS,
  2, AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.C.,

AND AT WELLINGTON WORKS, ALDERSHOT.


The most complete Catalogue of Military Works ever issued. Post Free on
application.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STRENGTH AND HOW TO OBTAIN IT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


